Following the emergence of the circumpolar current in the mid Oligocene era some 15 MYA , the Australian climate became increasingly arid, giving rise to a diverse group of arid specialised organisms, just as the wet tropical and seasonally wet areas gave rise to their own uniquely adapted species.
citation needed The fossil record of birds in Australia is patchy; however, there are records of the ancestors of contemporary species as early as the Late Oligocene.
citation needed A number of bird species have been introduced by humans; some, like the European Goldfinch and Greenfinch, coexist happily with Australian species, citation needed while others, such as the Common Starling, Common Blackbird, House Sparrow and Indian Mynah, are destructive of some native bird species and thus destabilise the native ecosystem.
citation needed One very common large seabird is the Australian Pelican, which can be found in most waterways in Australia.
The tree frogs, from family Hylidae, are common in high rainfall areas on the north and east coasts; there are 77 Australian species from three genera.
citation needed There is a single species from the world's dominant frog group, family Ranidae the Australian Wood Frog which only occurs in the Queensland rainforests.
Of these, the most venomous species, citation needed including the Fierce Snake, Eastern Brown Snake, Taipan and Eastern Tiger Snake are from the family Elapidae.
citation needed Thirty three sea snakes from family Hydrophiidae inhabit Australia's northern waters; many are extremely venomous.
Australia has only 11 species from the world's most significant snake family Colubridae; none are endemic, and they are considered to be relatively recent arrivals from Asia.
citation needed The Pygopodidae is a family of limbless lizards endemic to the Australian region; of the 34 species from eight genera, only one species does not occur in Australia.
There are 26 species of monitor lizard, citation needed family Varanidae, in Australia, where they are commonly known as goannas.
There are 389 species of skink from 38 genera, comprising about 50 of the total Australian lizard fauna; citation needed this group includes the blue tongued lizards.
citation needed Two families of freshwater fish have ancient origins the arowana or bony tongues, and the Queensland lungfish.
citation needed Apart from the ancient freshwater species, 70 of Australia's freshwater fish have affinities with tropical Indo Pacific marine species that have adapted to freshwater.
citation needed Two species of endangered freshwater shark are found in the Northern Territory.
Several exotic freshwater fish species, including brown, brook and rainbow trout, Atlantic and Chinook salmon, redfin perch, carp and mosquitofish, have been introduced to Australian waterways.
The introduced trout species have had serious negative impacts on a number of upland native fish species including trout cod, Macquarie perch and galaxias species as well as other upland fauna such as the Spotted Tree Frog.
citation needed Most of Australia's fish species are marine.
There are 80 species of grouper in Australian waters, citation needed including one of the world's biggest bony fish, the Giant Grouper, which can grow as large as 2.7 m and weigh up to 400 kg.
citation needed The overfishing of sharks has also significantly reduced shark numbers in Australian waters, and several species are now endangered.
citation needed A megamouth shark was found on a Perth beach in 1988; very little is known about this species, but this discovery may indicate the presence of the species in Australian coastal waters.
The largest group of invertebrates is the insects, comprising 75 of Australia's known species of animals.
citation needed The large family Parastacidae includes 124 species of Australian freshwater crayfish.
citation needed These include the world's smallest crayfish, the swamp crayfish, which does not exceed 30 mm in length, and the world's largest crayfish, the Tasmanian giant freshwater crayfish, measuring up to 76 cm long and weighing 4.5 kg.
A huge variety of marine invertebrates are found in Australian waters, with the Great Barrier Reef an important source of this diversity.
Venomous invertebrates include the box jellyfish, the blue ringed octopus, and ten species of cone snail, citation needed which can cause respiratory failure and death in humans.
citation needed Introduced invertebrate pests include the Asian mussel, New Zealand green lipped mussel, black striped mussel and the Northern Pacific seastar, all of which displace native shellfish.
citation needed There are many unique marine crustaceans in Australian waters.
citation needed The warm waters of northern Australia are home to many species of decapod crustaceans, including crabs, false crabs, hermit crabs, lobsters, shrimps, and prawns.
citation needed Less well known marine groups include the classes Remipedia, Cephalocarida, Branchiopoda, Maxillopoda which includes the barnacles, copepods and fish lice , and the Ostracoda.
Notable species include the Tasmanian giant crab, the second largest crab species in the world, citation needed found in deep water, and weighing up to 13 kg, and the Australian spiny lobsters, such as the Western rock lobster, which are distinct from other lobster species as they do not have claws.
The invasive species include birds Indian Mynah and fish common carp , insects red imported fire ant and molluscs Asian mussel .
Much of Australia's fauna is protected by legislation; citation needed a notable exception is kangaroos, which are prolific and are regularly culled.
