Mikhail arrives and kills Greta and Bonnie, only to be shot through the chest with a spear gun by Desmond who emerges from a closet inside the station where he had hidden after diving down a short time after Charlie did. 
Throughout the episode, flashforwards from years after "Through the Looking Glass"'s island events show that Jack has escaped the island and returned to work as a spinal surgeon, although it's not till the last one when Kate appears and Jack discusses the island that it becomes clear that they are flashforwards rather than flashbacks. 
He is distracted by a car wreck and goes to save those in need. 
The title is an allusion to Lewis Carroll's novel Through the Looking-Glass, and What Alice Found There and a reference to the fictitious Dharma Initiative station found in the previous episode. 
Despite not being mentioned in the official press release, then 15 year old Malcolm David Kelley returned to reprise his role as 10 year old Walt Lloyd, and received credit as a "special guest star". 
Kelley’s character had left the island in the second season finale, only 26 days prior to the events of "Through the Looking Glass", however, Kelley had not filmed an episode in over a year. 
In his single scene, Walt has visibly aged, appears taller and has a deeper voice. 
Monaghan hoped to return to Lost as a guest star in flashbacks or dreams. 
The scene was shot with a green screen in an abandoned Honolulu parking lot with the airport edited in. 
Despite the security measures, a complete and detailed episode synopsis was uploaded online over a week before the episode aired. 
With the announcement that the series would conclude 48 episodes after "Through the Looking Glass", they felt comfortable playing flashforwards as early as the third season finale. 
Charlie also sings a song in the episode that was written by Dominic Monaghan, who plays him. 
A Lost season finale is approximately twice as long the average Lost episode. 
Unlike most episodes, this episode did not feature a "previously on Lost…" recap at the start of the episode when it first aired; however, it was originally preceded by a clip-show titled "Lost: The Answers", which recapped the third season. 
The episode received a 5.9/15 in the key adults 18–49 demographic. 
The Los Angeles Times wrote that the episode was "an unusually action-packed and sanguinary spring cleaning that… left a host of… characters… dead", Access Atlanta said "it was deeply satisfying. 
The first hour started a bit slow but the second hour had great twists, wonderfully emotional moments, both happy and sad", and the Associated Press said that "the powerful season-ending episode redeemed the series with the shrewdness and intrigue that made it so addictive in the first place.
The San Francisco Chronicle wrote that "not only was the pace fast, the teases taut, and the answers plenty, the writers took a compelling gamble… [by telling] viewers that in the future… maybe all… of the people on the Lost island get off. 
The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette commented that the flashforward "twist gave the saga renewed momentum as it begins its march toward a 2010 finish.
" The season finale was summed up as "a mind-blower, for sure, a radical two hours that gave us major fake-outs, an army of dead bodies, the possibility of rescue [and] diverse portraits of heroism" by The Boston Globe, who added that the death of Charlie was "the most touching loss of the series so far." 
Time ranked the episode as the best of 2007 and the "Rattlesnake in the Mailbox" as one of the ten best scenes of 2007 television. 
TV Guide described "Through the Looking Glass" as "a dizzying exercise in adventure, sustained tension and time-shifting rug pulling 
IGN gave the double episode a perfect 10/10 
– the best review of the season – saying it was "nothing short of a masterpiece of storytelling with a brilliantly paced narrative.
Television Without Pity gave the third season finale an "A". 
Film and television director and writer Kevin Smith said that "to do seasons and then suddenly throw a massive curveball is just so dramatically satisfying, you just take your hats off to the writers in a big, bad way." 
The episode was nominated in the categories of "Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series", "Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series" and "Outstanding Single-Camera Picture Editing for a Drama Series" for the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards, but it failed to win in any category. 
