Sayid Jarrah (Naveen Andrews), Jin Kwon (Daniel Dae Kim) and Bernard Nadler (Sam Anderson) remain at the beach, tasked with shooting the dynamite-rigged tents while the rest of the survivors journey with Danielle Rousseau (Mira Furlan) to the radio tower to communicate with Naomi Dorrit's (Marsha Thomason) nearby ship.
After knocking Desmond Hume (Henry Ian Cusick) unconscious, Charlie Pace (Dominic Monaghan) dives down into The Looking Glass, a research station of the Dharma Initiative, with the hope of disabling the system jamming outgoing transmissions.
Mikhail arrives and kills Greta and Bonnie, only to be shot through the chest with a spear gun by Desmond who emerges from a closet inside the station where he had hidden after diving down a short time after Charlie did.
Meanwhile, Ben tells Richard Alpert (Nestor Carbonell) to lead the rest of the Others to the "Temple" and then leaves the Others with his adopted daughter, Alex (Tania Raymonde) Rousseau's daughter and Karl's girlfriend, to meet up with the survivors to persuade Jack not to call Naomi's ship for rescue.
Ben orders the shooting of Sayid, Jin, and Bernard, and when Jack hears three shots, he attacks Ben and punches him in the face repeatedly leaving Ben bloody.
Locke cannot bring himself to kill Jack, who communicates with George Minkowski on Naomi's boat.
Throughout the episode, flashforwards from years after "Through the Looking Glass"'s island events show that Jack has escaped the island and returned to work as a spinal surgeon, although it's not till the last one when Kate appears and Jack discusses the island that it becomes clear that they are flashforwards rather than flashbacks.
Kelley’s character had left the island in the second season finale, only 26 days prior to the events of "Through the Looking Glass", however, Kelley had not filmed an episode in over a year.
Jack Bender stated that Matthew Fox "really commits body and soul into the story he's telling" and Fox questioned whether he had ever been more tired than while shooting the double episode.
With the announcement that the series would conclude 48 episodes after "Through the Looking Glass", they felt comfortable playing flashforwards as early as the third season finale.
Cuse said that he and Lindelof think the finale is "very cool [and] we're very proud of it." Stephen McPherson, the president of ABC Entertainment, called "Through the Looking Glass" "one of the best episodes" of the series.
A featurette called "Lost: On Location" features cast and crew discussing production of select episodes, including "Through the Looking Glass".
The two-hour Wednesday broadcast on ABC made Lost the fourth most watched series of the week with an average of 13.86 million American viewers, below the third season average of 14.6 million.
The first hour started a bit slow but the second hour had great twists, wonderfully emotional moments, both happy and sad", and the Associated Press said that "the powerful season-ending episode redeemed the series with the shrewdness and intrigue that made it so addictive in the first place." The San Francisco Chronicle wrote that "not only was the pace fast, the teases taut, and the answers plenty, the writers took a compelling gamble… [by telling] viewers that in the future… maybe all… of the people on the Lost island get off.
But in Jack, our guide through this series, the writers definitively say, 'Be careful what you wish for.'" The San Jose Mercury News called the finale a "jaw-dropping exercise in good storytelling." The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette commented that the flashforward "twist gave the saga renewed momentum as it begins its march toward a 2010 finish." The season finale was summed up as "a mind-blower, for sure, a radical two hours that gave us major fake-outs, an army of dead bodies, the possibility of rescue [and] diverse portraits of heroism" by The Boston Globe, who added that the death of Charlie was "the most touching loss of the series so far." The Palm Beach Post and Wizard named it the "Best Cliffhanger" of 2007.
E! said that "Through the Looking Glass" was possibly "the best episode ever of the entire series." TV Guide described "Through the Looking Glass" as "a dizzying exercise in adventure, sustained tension and time-shifting rug pulling [that was] spectacularly produced, amazingly directed and gloriously acted." IGN gave the double episode a perfect 10/10 – the best review of the season – saying it was "nothing short of a masterpiece of storytelling with a brilliantly paced narrative." IGN would conclude that the flashforward was the "Biggest Shock" in 2007 television.
BuddyTV praised the unpredictability, saying that "no other show can even attempt to do what Lost does." BuddyTV would later call "Through the Looking Glass" the best finale of 2007 and Charlie's death the saddest TV death of 2007.
The Sydney Morning Herald wrote that Lost "may have unjumped [the shark] with [the] flashforward." Entertainment Weekly ranked it as one of the top ten episodes of 2007, saying that the cliffhanger "[revealed] new dimensions to [Lost's] creative world." Zap2It questioned "whether to be deeply frustrated (again), really, really confused (a distinct possibility) or just in awe of the incredible mind-(ahem) show runners… have pulled off." The writing for Locke was criticized, and one IGN writer said that "it seems irrational that he would go and [stab Naomi] in the back without explaining himself." Lindelof stated "that we might be willing to give [Locke] the benefit of the doubt for any action he took in response to [lying, gutshot, in a pit of Dharma corpses for two days and on the verge of taking his own life], even if considered slightly 'out of character'." Film and television director and writer Kevin Smith said that "to do seasons and then suddenly throw a massive curveball is just so dramatically satisfying, you just take your hats off to the writers in a big, bad way." The episode was nominated in the categories of "Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series", "Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series" and "Outstanding Single-Camera Picture Editing for a Drama Series" for the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards, but it failed to win in any category.
"Through the Looking Glass" was the AOL primetime poll winner and editors' pick for "Best Season-Ending Cliffhanger".
"Through the Looking Glass" won "Drama Episode of the Year" at the Los Angeles Times Gold Derby TV Awards.
