After knocking Desmond Hume Henry Ian Cusick unconscious, Charlie Pace Dominic Monaghan dives down into The Looking Glass, a research station of the Dharma Initiative, with the hope of disabling the system jamming outgoing transmissions.
Mikhail arrives and kills Greta and Bonnie, only to be shot through the chest with a spear gun by Desmond who emerges from a closet inside the station where he had hidden after diving down a short time after Charlie did.
Meanwhile, Ben tells Richard Alpert Nestor Carbonell to lead the rest of the Others to the Temple and then leaves the Others with his adopted daughter, Alex Tania Raymonde Rousseau's daughter and Karl's girlfriend, to meet up with the survivors to persuade Jack not to call Naomi's ship for rescue.
Ben orders the shooting of Sayid, Jin, and Bernard, and when Jack hears three shots, he attacks Ben and punches him in the face repeatedly leaving Ben bloody.
Throughout the episode, flashforwards from years after Through the Looking Glass 's island events show that Jack has escaped the island and returned to work as a spinal surgeon, although it's not till the last one when Kate appears and Jack discusses the island that it becomes clear that they are flashforwards rather than flashbacks.
Kelley s character had left the island in the second season finale, only 26 days prior to the events of Through the Looking Glass , however, Kelley had not filmed an episode in over a year.
The storyline of Charlie's death was conceived while producing the latter part of the second season, after the storyline of Charlie's drug addiction finished.
Jack Bender stated that Matthew Fox really commits body and soul into the story he's telling and Fox questioned whether he had ever been more tired than while shooting the double episode.
However, Cuse and Lindelof only started fleshing out the idea at the end of the first season, after they realized that flashbacks would eventually stop being revelatory and knew that they would eventually have to switch to flashforwards.
With the announcement that the series would conclude 48 episodes after Through the Looking Glass , they felt comfortable playing flashforwards as early as the third season finale.
Stephen McPherson, the president of ABC Entertainment, called Through the Looking Glass one of the best episodes of the series.
A featurette called Lost On Location features cast and crew discussing production of select episodes, including Through the Looking Glass .
The two hour Wednesday broadcast on ABC made Lost the fourth most watched series of the week with an average of 13.86 million American viewers, below the third season average of 14.6 million.
The Los Angeles Times wrote that the episode was an unusually action packed and sanguinary spring cleaning that left a host of characters dead , Access Atlanta said it was deeply satisfying.
The first hour started a bit slow but the second hour had great twists, wonderfully emotional moments, both happy and sad , and the Associated Press said that the powerful season ending episode redeemed the series with the shrewdness and intrigue that made it so addictive in the first place.
The San Francisco Chronicle wrote that not only was the pace fast, the teases taut, and the answers plenty, the writers took a compelling gamble by telling viewers that in the future maybe all of the people on the Lost island get off.
But in Jack, our guide through this series, the writers definitively say, 'Be careful what you wish for.' The San Jose Mercury News called the finale a jaw dropping exercise in good storytelling.
The season finale was summed up as a mind blower, for sure, a radical two hours that gave us major fake outs, an army of dead bodies, the possibility of rescue and diverse portraits of heroism by The Boston Globe, who added that the death of Charlie was the most touching loss of the series so far.
E said that Through the Looking Glass was possibly the best episode ever of the entire series.
IGN gave the double episode a perfect 10 10 the best review of the season saying it was nothing short of a masterpiece of storytelling with a brilliantly paced narrative.
BuddyTV would later call Through the Looking Glass the best finale of 2007 and Charlie's death the saddest TV death of 2007.
Through the Looking Glass was the AOL primetime poll winner and editors' pick for Best Season Ending Cliffhanger .
Through the Looking Glass won Drama Episode of the Year at the Los Angeles Times Gold Derby TV Awards.
