Lego Star Wars II's gameplay is from a third-person perspective, and takes place in a 3D game world that contains objects, environments and characters designed to resemble Lego pieces. 
Its gameplay—a combination of the action-adventure, platform, and sometimes puzzle genres—shares elements with that of Lego Star Wars: The Video Game. 
While Lego Star Wars followed the events of The Phantom Menace, Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, Lego Star Wars II is based on A New Hope, The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi. 
During game play, players can collect Lego studs–small, disk-shaped objects that serve as the game's currency. 
At the counter, the player may use their Lego studs to purchase characters, vehicles, gameplay hints and extras, or activate cheat codes. 
The game also features bonus levels. 
Character abilities have a greater role in Lego Star Wars II than in Lego Star Wars. 
The player can unlock the "Use Old Save" extra, which imports all unlocked characters from Lego Star Wars for use in free play; however, a Lego Star Wars saved game must be present on the same memory card that contains Lego Star Wars II's save data. 
The game generates names for the characters based on the pieces used (for example, a character made from pieces of Darth Vader and C-3PO might have the name "Darth-3PO"); alternately, the player may create a name. 
Lego Star Wars II was created by the Cheshire, England, game developer Traveller's Tales. 
Lego Star Wars II was created for Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X, Xbox, GameCube, PlayStation 2, Game Boy Advance (GBA), Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable (PSP), and Xbox 360. 
Lego Star Wars II uses a modified Lego Star Wars engine. 
Character customization, an entirely new concept, was considered a significant improvement over the original game, and is one of three features highlighted on the game's final back cover. 
However, they were quickly removed, and LucasArts, if telephoned, did not confirm or deny the game's development. 
Because the original Lego Star Wars had been well received commercially and critically, selling 3.3 million copies by March 2006 and winning several awards, its sequel was highly anticipated by both fans of the original game and video game publications such as IGN and GameSpot. 
Several gameplay features—such as two-dimensional graphics, limited character selection, and coverage only of the film A New Hope—distinguish this version of the game from the versions for other platforms. 
Lego Star Wars and Lego Star Wars II were compiled in Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga, developed by Traveller's Tales and published by LucasArts. 
The Complete Saga incorporated improvements from the sequel into the original game, and expanded the Mos Eisley Cantina to allow access to both games' levels. 
Critics were divided on the game's level of difficulty. 
A review by USA Today's Brett Molina claimed that "[t]he game's difficulty is balanced well enough so kids won't feel too frustrated while older gamers will still find a solid challenge" and gave the game an overall score of 8 out of 10. 
Critics disliked the game's Game Boy Advance and Nintendo DS versions. 
Lego Star Wars II won and was nominated for numerous awards, and ranked on several video game lists. 
We Don't Want You to Miss" list, Time magazine's list of the top ten video games of 2006, and GameSpy's PC "Game of the Year" list. 
It received the 2006 Game of the Year award from Nick Jr. and from IGN (for PC games only). 
Character customization—a new feature in Lego Star Wars II—reappeared in subsequent Lego video games such as Lego Batman: The Videogame.
