The player has a health meter, which is displayed on the game's heads-up display.
The game is broken into levels, which are accessed from the cantina; each film is represented by six levels, representing key locations and scenes in that film.
However, story mode restricts playable characters to those followed in the film scenes the levels are based on, while free play offers all those unlocked.
The player can unlock the "Use Old Save" extra, which imports all unlocked characters from Lego Star Wars for use in free play; however, a Lego Star Wars saved game must be present on the same memory card that contains Lego Star Wars II's save data.
The game generates names for the characters based on the pieces used (for example, a character made from pieces of Darth Vader and C-3PO might have the name "Darth-3PO"); alternately, the player may create a name.
Character customization, an entirely new concept, was considered a significant improvement over the original game, and is one of three features highlighted on the game's final back cover.
The game's North American release fell on September 12 for all platforms, coinciding with the release of the individual two-disc DVD releases of the films on which it was based.
Several gameplay features—such as two-dimensional graphics, limited character selection, and coverage only of the film A New Hope—distinguish this version of the game from the versions for other platforms.
A review by USA Today's Brett Molina claimed that "[t]he game's difficulty is balanced well enough so kids won't feel too frustrated while older gamers will still find a solid challenge" and gave the game an overall score of 8 out of 10.
In contrast, the previously poorly received DS version was listed as one of the "tears" on IGN's September 2009 "Cheers & Tears" list of action games for the DS.
It has been certified as part of the budget lines Platinum Hits for the Xbox 360, Greatest Hits for the PlayStation 2 (each represents a worldwide sales total of at least 400,000 on its respective platform), and Player's Choice for the GameCube (250,000).
