Writing about the strikes which were taking place at the time, Solzhenitsyn described this issue Prisoners all over gulag, for this reason and others, were becoming increasingly bold and impudent in the months preceding the uprising, with hunger strikes, work stoppages, large scale insubordination, and punitive violence becoming more and more common.
The uprising's roots can be traced back to a large in shipment of thieves the accepted slang term for the habitual criminals who were also imprisoned in Gulag along with the political prisoners.
Of these above mentioned ethnic blocks, the Ukrainians, many of whom were exiled members of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists by some estimates making up over a half of the camps' population were undoubtedly the most important, and they quickly asserted a leadership role amongst the prisoners.
Into this changed climate the thieves were injected and, to the surprise of the camp authorities, they instantly joined forces with the politicals, meeting secretly on the first night with the Ukrainian Centre and establishing a pact.
This was due both to the fact that they recognized their odds against the almost 8,000 strong body of well armed and united political prisoners, and because thieves across the whole Gulag caught wind of the politicals' campaign against the stoolies and began to admire and respect them.
The entire Kengir camp complex formed a large rectangle, divided up width wise into four distinct areas the women's camp, the service yard , where all the workshops and storerooms were located, and two camps for men, each with its own jailhouse for punishing prisoners or hiding stoolies.
During the night, though, thieves, now joined by the politicals, started breaking up their bunks and cells, trying to add to their cache of shivs and arm those without weapons, while the camp authorities posted machine gunners at the hole in the wall.
The following day they feigned acquiescence to the prisoners demands and, while the prisoners then agreeably went off to work outside the camp, the guards busied themselves patching up the broken down wall.
This time also saw the first propaganda offensive by the camp authorities they re enacted, in full prisoner costume, the alleged rape of the women prisoners and photographed themselves, releasing the photographs and declaring that the revolt was in fact a cover for debauchery and hedonism , setting the tone for the many that would follow.
After realizing these sleights of hand on the part of the camp authorities, the prisoners quickly and forcefully reasserted themselves, running amok and sending the guards fleeing from the camp again.
One hymn in particular, with its simultaneously mournful and celebratory tone and its stirring demand for freedom, stands as representative of the prevailing themes in the works produced during the uprising In addition to the renewed presence of religious regalia, religious practices were also given new life.
Kuznetsov and his administration were originally delegated to conduct negotiations with the camp authorities on behalf of the prisoners, but as the prisoners' control of the camp lasted beyond expectation and as demand for law, order, and efficiency increased, the jurisdiction of this government increased in turn.
Therefore, various government departments were quickly created The first expansion of the government's authority came as a natural extension of its role as mouthpiece of the prisoners propaganda.
The guards broadcast propaganda over loudspeakers into the camp, urging surrender and decrying the loss of days of valuable prison labor and the alleged detrimental effect it was having on the Soviet economy.
This too was terminated by the authorities after a few days, and thereafter the prisoners used a modified motor as a generator and even improvised a running tap hydroelectric station to supply power to the government headquarters and medical barracks.
Solzhenitsyn explained To these generals and others were presented the same set of demands punishment of the soldiers responsible for the murder of various prisoners and beating of women prisoners; that prisoners who had been transferred to other camps as punishment for participating in a strike be brought back; that prisoners no longer had to wear degrading number patches or be locked into their dormitories at night; that the walls separating camp divisions namely between the men's and women's camps not be rebuilt; that an eight hour work day be instituted; that limits be taken off the number of letters they could send and receive; that certain hated camp guards and officials be removed from Kengir; and that, most importantly, their cases be reviewed.
Prior to the raid, attempts were made by the camp authorities to sow civil violence within the camp, both so that the prisoners would slaughter each other and make the job easier for the invading troops, and to provide an ostensible justification for the massive armed intervention to begin with.
While these efforts largely failed, another objective of the authorities to draw out orthodox Communists and Soviet loyalists was successful and a number of them fled the camp in the days before the raid, including a high ranking member of the prisoner's government who would later reappear as a voice urging surrender on the guards' propaganda loudspeakers.
The leader of the prisoners, Kuznetsov, even betrayed his wariness in a speech, retold by Solzhenitsyn Making matters worse for the prisoners, the day before the raid it was announced on the guards' loudspeakers that their demand to meet with a member of the Central Committee was to be granted.
This had the effect of lowering the prisoners guard and creating a less hostile and more favourable disposition towards the camp authorities, who were planning to violently crush the prisoners all the while.
Some tanks carried in barbed wire laden trestles, and these were immediately set down as a means of quickly dividing up the camp and hindering the prisoners' freedom of movement.
According to a number of survivors of the camp, five to seven hundred prisoners were either killed or wounded in the uprising, with an additional six of the highest ranking prisoners later being executed, Knopkus among them.
On the day following the raid, almost a thousand prisoners were shipped off to different camps and the remaining prisoners were occupied with the task of, once again, rebuilding the destroyed wall, sealing themselves back into a life of imprisonment.
Among the strikes and rebellions that were taking place in Gulags across the Soviet Union in this period, the uprising at Kengir was perhaps the most significant.
While Stalin's death, Beria's fall, and Khrushchev's rise bore much promise for the prisoners, who had long expected general amnesties and rehabilitation to follow these events, the role of the Kengir uprising in hastening this process cannot be overlooked.
In a 1978 review of Solzhenitsyn's book, Hilton Kramer of The New York Times declared that the uprising restored a measure of humane civilization to the prisoners before the state was able to assert its implacable power again.
At a 2004 reunion of Kengir prisoners, a survivor of the camp mentioned that, despite the brutality and loss of life that came with the uprising's suppression, the 40 days engendered the prisoners with a great feeling of freeing one's spirit , and another prisoner recalled that I had not before then, and have not since, felt such a sense of freedom as I did then both sentiments echoed often by Solzhenitsyn.
Before the authorities came up with the idea of using their own rival kites to tangle and bring down the prisoner's kites with, they kept a large retinue of guards and warders, on horseback and motorcycle, waiting for the leaflets to be dropped from the kites so that they could, literally, chase down and retrieve them before they could be read by members of the public.
