The Viet Minh paramilitary forces around Road One originated mainly from a region of fortified villages dispersed along sand dunes and salt marshes between Hué to the south, and Quang Tri to the north.
French forces had suffered from Viet Minh ambushes, an attack that the latter had become very proficient at throughout the war, most notably in the annihilation of Group Mobiles 42 and 100.
Viet Minh Regiment 95 repeatedly deployed these tactics, inflicting severe losses on the French forces passing along Road One, which led to its French nickname of la rue sans joie the street without joy .
Regiment 95 was, along with Regiments 18 and 101, part of the Viet Minh Division 325, commanded by General Tran Quy Ha. The division was formed in 1951 from pre existing units in Thua Thien just north of Road One, and became operational in the summer of 1952.
By early summer 1953, thanks in part to the wind down of hostilities in the Korean War, the French command had sufficient reserves at hand to begin clearing the Viet Minh back from Road One. They assembled 30 battalions, two armored regiments and two artillery regiments for one of the largest operations of the conflict.
The difficult terrain was to prove the decisive factor and gave a major advantage to the one Viet Minh regiment tasked with defending the Street Without Joy. From a 100 meter 109 yd deep beach of hard sand the French landing forces were to advance through a series of dunes.
Group C was to advance from the south west into the back of Van Trinh through the swamps, and consisted of the 9th Moroccan Tabor, 27th Vietnamese Infantry Battalion, 2nd Battalion of the 4th Moroccan Rifle Regiment, 1 Commando, a tank platoon of the Moroccan Colonials, an Armored Patrol Boat Platoon, and an LCM Platoon.
This French force, vastly outnumbering the Viet Minh regiment opposing it, was tasked with sealing the Communist forces into a tight pocket, and systematically destroying them, as well as capturing as many prisoners, arms caches and as much equipment as possible.
A minor fire fight had taken place on the southern edge of Group B's advance when an Algerian company exchanged fire with 20 30 Viet Minh and suffered the first French fatalities.
Group D, finally, was tasked with advancing south from its landing point to close off an escape route that ran between the sea and an inland lagoon towards the city of Hué.
Landing at 04 30, the group made quick progress through the beach and dunes, secured the small city of Thé Chi Dong and hit the north coast of the lagoon by 05 30, thereby sealing off that escape route with no enemy contact.
With the landings and the encirclement of Regiment 95 complete and the net deemed secure, the French forces began the second phase of the operation and began to sweep through the area for the encircled Viet Minh.
Each French group began to move through the villages around Road One in an attempt to locate the Viet Minh forces.
The Moroccan forces spread out into the surrounding rice paddies, and the bazookas of the Viet Minh missed the French tanks.
Leblanc had realized the intentions of Regiment 95's commander, and had requested one of the two reserve paratroop units to be deployed at the border between the network of temples and the dune filled area in front of where Group D had originally landed.
This paratroop unit, 2nd Battalion of the 1st Colonial Parachute Regiment, began to advance towards the canal at 10 45, 15 minutes before Group B entered Dong Qué.
At 08 45, Moroccan units of Group C were investigating the village of Phu An on the opposite side of the lagoon from Group D's landing area, when they came under heavy fire.
At 09 40, the commander of Group C called up various reinforcements from Hué including two companies of Vietnamese trainee NCOs and five infantry companies, two of which came via landing craft and did not reach the beleaguered elements of Group C until 18 00, half an hour after the Moroccans had finally counter attacked and occupied Phu An. The 2nd Battalion of the Parachute Chasseurs Regiment had been requested to drop at 14 00 to support the advanced elements of Group C but did not jump until 16 50 and thus failed to assemble before the Moroccans themselves occupied Phu An. With the final capture of Phu An, the extreme southern tip of the encirclement, the pincer movement was complete.
Crabs and Alligators were stationed on, or in some cases in, the canal network, and French infantry were scattered across the edge of the pocket throughout that night in order to detect escaping Viet Minh.
On the morning of 29 July 1953, the French forces continued to advance into the remaining 23 square kilometer 9 sq mi pocket, encountering neither Viet Minh nor civilian.
The French then undertook a methodical house to house search of the entire area, sweeping each village, and the surrounding paddy fields and jungle, risking encounter with Viet Minh caltrops.
By the end of 29 July, with resistance to the French forces having ceased, a general withdrawal of paratroopers, amphibious groups and marines began.
In comparison to Fall, South Vietnamese general Lam Quang Thi states in his memoirs that Operation Camargue was one of the most successful French military operations during the Indochina war in the area of Road One. Newspapers stated that the operation had been a total success, demonstrating once more the new aggressiveness and mobility of the French forces.
