A network of canals connected Bruges with the coast at Ostend and Zeebrugge, through which small warships such as destroyers, light cruisers and submarines could travel and find a safe harbour from which to launch raids into the English Channel and along the coasts of South-East England. 
During 1915 and 1916, the German Navy had developed Bruges from a small Flanders port into a major naval centre with large concrete bunkers for U-boats to shelter from nightly bombing raids, extensive barracks and training facilities for U-boat crews, and similar facilities for other classes of raiding warship. 
The significance of Bruges was not lost on British naval planners and two previous attempts to close the exit at Ostend, the smaller and narrower of the Bruges canals, had ended in failure. 
The First Ostend Raid was conducted in tandem with the similar Zeebrugge Raid led by Admiral Roger Keyes on 23 April 1918; a large scale operation to block the wider canal at Zeebrugge. 
As British forces on the South-East Coast regrouped, remanned and repaired following heavy losses at Zeebrugge, Keyes planned a return to Ostend with the intention of closing the canal and consequently severing Bruges from the sea, closing the harbour and trapping the 18 U-boats and 25 destroyers present for months to come. 
Two obsolete cruisers, the aged HMS Sappho and the battered veteran of Zeebrugge HMS Vindictive were fitted out for the operation by having their non-essential equipment stripped out, their essential equipment reinforced and picked crews selected from volunteers. 
Their advance would be covered by artillery fire against German shore positions from the heavy monitors at distance and at closer range by gunfire from the destroyers. 
This operation should thoroughly block the channel and coupled with the blockage at Zeebrugge (which the British authorities believed to be fully closed), should prevent use of Bruges by German raiding craft for months to come. 
At the same time, long range artillery of the Royal Marine Artillery opened fire on Ostend from Allied positions around the Belgian town of Ypres. 
In preparation for the attack, Godsal and Lynes had carefully consulted available charts of Ostend following the previous operation's failure caused by German repositioning of navigation buoys. 
Steaming back and forth across the harbour entrance in the fog as the monitors and German shore batteries engaged in a long range artillery duel over the lost cruiser, Godsal looked for the piers marking the entrance to the canal. 
As he searched, two German torpedo boats sailed from Ostend to intercept the cruiser, but in the heavy fog they collided and, disabled, limped back to shore. 
Heading straight into the mouth of the canal, guided by a flare dropped by the launch, Vindictive became an instant target of the German batteries and was badly damaged, the shellfire exacerbating the damage suffered in the earlier Zeebrugge Raid and seriously damaging Vindictive's port propeller. 
As Drummond turned his boat seawards and proceeded back to the offshore squadron which was still engaged in an artillery duel with the German defenders, one of the missing launches, ML276 passed her, having caught up with the lost cruiser at this late stage. 
Despite heavy machine gun and artillery fire, Bourke returned to the scene of the wreck four times before they discovered two sailors and the Vindictive's badly wounded navigation officer Sir John Alleyne clinging to an upturned boat. 
Small coastal submarines of the UC Class had been able to pass through the channel as early as the morning after the Zeebrugge Raid and German naval engineers were able to dredge channels around the blockages at both ports over the coming weeks. 
