A network of canals connected Bruges with the coast at Ostend and Zeebrugge, through which small warships such as destroyers, light cruisers and submarines could travel and find a safe harbour from which to launch raids into the English Channel and along the coasts of South-East England.
Both attacks largely failed, but whilst at Zeebrugge the operation came so close to success that it took several months for the British authorities to realise that it had been unsuccessful, at Ostend the attack had ended catastrophically.
As British forces on the South-East Coast regrouped, remanned and repaired following heavy losses at Zeebrugge, Keyes planned a return to Ostend with the intention of closing the canal and consequently severing Bruges from the sea, closing the harbour and trapping the 18 U-boats and 25 destroyers present for months to come.
Other officers came forward to participate as well and Keyes and Lynes devised an operational plan to attack the canal mouth at Ostend once more.
Vindictive was commanded by Godsal; her six officers and 48 crew were all volunteer veterans of the previous failed attempt by HMS Brilliant.
The two sacrificial cruisers were, as with the previous attack, accompanied by four heavy monitors under Keyes' command, eight destroyers under Lynes in HMS Faulknor and five motor launches.
The launches, like the blockships, were all crewed by volunteers; mostly veterans of previous operations against the Belgian ports.
This operation should thoroughly block the channel and coupled with the blockage at Zeebrugge (which the British authorities believed to be fully closed), should prevent use of Bruges by German raiding craft for months to come.
In preparation for the attack, Godsal and Lynes had carefully consulted available charts of Ostend following the previous operation's failure caused by German repositioning of navigation buoys.
Steaming back and forth across the harbour entrance in the fog as the monitors and German shore batteries engaged in a long range artillery duel over the lost cruiser, Godsal looked for the piers marking the entrance to the canal.
Most of the bridge crew were killed or wounded by the blast, including First Lieutenant Victor Crutchley, who staggered to the wheel and attempted to force the ship to make the full turn into the channel.
As Drummond turned his boat seawards and proceeded back to the offshore squadron which was still engaged in an artillery duel with the German defenders, one of the missing launches, ML276 passed her, having caught up with the lost cruiser at this late stage.
Despite heavy machine gun and artillery fire, Bourke returned to the scene of the wreck four times before they discovered two sailors and the Vindictive's badly wounded navigation officer Sir John Alleyne clinging to an upturned boat.
Offshore, as the Warwick's officers, Keyes' staff and the survivors of the Vindictive gathered on the destroyer's deck to discuss the operation, an enormous explosion rocked the ship causing her to list severely.
The channel was largely blocked and so Bruges was ostensibly closed off from the open sea, even if the position of the blockship meant that smaller ships could get through.
Small coastal submarines of the UC Class had been able to pass through the channel as early as the morning after the Zeebrugge Raid and German naval engineers were able to dredge channels around the blockages at both ports over the coming weeks.
