Christopher Smart was an English poet who was confined to asylums during a time of debate about the nature of madness and its treatment.
In 1758, Battie and others argued that those deemed mad were abused under the British asylum system, and they pushed for parliamentary action.
Agreeing with Szasz's position, philosopher Michel Foucault emphasised that asylums were used in the 18th century to attack dissenting views and that the idea of madness was a cultural fear held by the British public, rather than a legitimate medical condition.
18th century treatment of inpatients was simple they were to be fed daily a light diet of bread, oatmeal, some meat or cheese, and a little amount of beer, which were inadequate in meeting daily nutritional needs; they were denied contact without outsiders, including family members; and they would be denied access to that which was deemed to be the cause of their madness these causes ranged from alcohol and food to working outside .
On 5 June 1756, Smart's father in law Newbery published, without permission, Smart's Hymn to the Supreme Being, a poem which thanked God for recovery from an illness of some kind, possibly a disturbed mental state .
The publication of Hymn to the Supreme Being marked the beginning of Smart's obsession with religion and eventual confinement for madness because he began praying without ceasing .
Christopher Hunter, Smart's biographer and nephew, described the situation Hunter reports that Samuel Johnson visited Smart during the latter's confinement, and it was Johnson that, on the first approaches of Mr Smart's malady, wrote several papers for a periodical publication in which that gentleman was concerned.
However, at no time did Smart ever believe himself to be insane; these meetings began before Smart was ever put into asylum because he still contributed, although not as significantly, to the Universal Visiter.
There are other possibilities beyond madness or religious fervor that may have led to Smart's confinement Newbery may have used the imprisonment of his son in law as leverage to control the publication of Smart's work and as a warning to others who worked for him not to cross him.
If Smart was placed into the asylum as a result of actions at St James's, he would not have been the only one, since records show that the Board of the Green Cloth was responsible for admitting sixteen people to Bethlem Hospital for frenzy at St James's Park during the century prior to Smart being placed in St Luke's.
During his time in asylum, Smart busied himself with a daily ritual of writing poetry; these lyric fragments eventually formed his Jubilate Agno and A Song to David.
Although 20th century critics debate whether his new poetic self examination represents an expression of evangelical Christianity, his poetry during his isolation does show a desire for unmediated revelation from God. There is an inner light that serves as a focal point for Smart and his poems written during his confinement, and that inner light connects him to the Christian God. Few details are known about Smart's time at St Luke's Hospital for Lunatics.
There is little information about Smart's condition during his stay at St Luke's, possibly because Battie's denied his patients from being visited, including by their own family members.
However, Mr Potter's private madhouse was not homely , and Smart's treatments were far worse, as he describes For they work on me with their harping irons, which is a barbarous instrument, because I am more unguarded than others Jubilate Agno B 129 .
There is little information about how and why Smart was released from asylum, but his daughter claimed He grew better, and some misjudging friends who misconstrued Mr Newbery s great kindness in placing him under necessary salutary restriction which might possibly have eventually wrought a cure, invited him to dinner and he returned to his confinement no more.
Jubilate Agno stayed in manuscript form and passed into the hands of the friends of William Cowper, a poet also placed into asylum and Smart's contemporary, when they investigated the concept of madness .
Most contemporary literary critics knew of Smart's time in asylum and, upon publication of his A Song to David, called attention to aspects of the poem which they could use to claim that Smart was still mad .
The view was widely held, and the poet William Mason wrote to Thomas Gray, I have seen his Song to David from thence conclude him as mad as ever.
It was a century before a positive twist was put on Christopher Smart's time in asylum; the Victorian poet Robert Browning argued that A Song to David was great because Smart was mad at the time.
In his poem Parleyings 1887 , Browning claimed To Browning, Smart's temporary madness was what allowed A Song to David to compose poetry similar to that of John Milton and John Keats.
Christopher Smart, as Browning's poem continued, Browning's remarks brought about a later appreciation of A Song to David and Smart's madness.
The 19th century poet Dante Gabriel Rossetti emphasised the benefits of Smart's madness and claimed that A Song to David was the only great accomplished poem of the last century.
Seven years after Palgrave, critic John Churton Collins agreed with Rosetti and Palgrave, but to a lesser extent, when he wrote, This poem stands alone, the most extraordinary phenomenon, perhaps, in our literature, the one rapt strain in the poetry of the eighteenth century, the work of a poet who, though he produced much, has not produced elsewhere a single line which indicates the power here displayed.
The 20th century view among critics favoured that Smart suffered from some kind of mental distress when writing his poems.
Yet in the poem one sees the morbidly religious mind which, in disorder, was to produce the Jubilate Agno, and, with order restored, the Song to David.
Arthur Sherbo, in 1967, argued that The nature of Smart's madness is impossible to diagnose at this distance in time and then argued that The possible religious component of Smart's condition was taken up by 20th century critics as an explanation for why the 18th century saw Smart as mad.
Laurence Binyon, in 1934, believed that religion played a major role in how society viewed Smart Smart's madness seems to have taken the form of a literal interpretation of the injunction Pray without ceasing.
