Heavy metal is traditionally characterized by loud distorted guitars, emphatic rhythms, dense bass and drum sound, and vigorous vocals.
New York Times critic Jon Pareles writes, In the taxonomy of popular music, heavy metal is a major subspecies of hard rock the breed with less syncopation, less blues, more showmanship and more brute force.
The bass guitar provides the low end sound crucial to making the music heavy .
Following the lead set by Jimi Hendrix, Cream and The Who, early heavy metal acts such as Blue Cheer set new benchmarks for volume.
Robert Walser argues that, alongside blues and R B, the assemblage of disparate musical styles known...as 'classical music' has been a major influence on heavy metal since the genre's earliest days.
However, it would be clearly wrong to claim that traditions such as blues, rock, heavy metal, rap or dance music derive primarily from 'art music.' Black Sabbath and the many metal bands they inspired have concentrated lyrically on dark and depressing subject matter to an extent hitherto unprecedented in any form of pop music, according to scholars David Hatch and Stephen Millward.
Death is a predominant theme in heavy metal, routinely featuring in the lyrics of bands as otherwise widely different as Slayer and W.A.S.P. The more extreme forms of death metal and grindcore tend to have aggressive and gory lyrics.
Deriving from the genre's roots in blues music, sex is another important topic a thread running from Led Zeppelin's suggestive lyrics to the more explicit references of glam and nu metal bands.
As with much popular music, visual imagery plays a large role in heavy metal.
In addition to its sound and lyrics, a heavy metal band's image is expressed in album sleeve art, logos, stage sets, clothing, and music videos.
Pioneered by the heavy metal act X Japan in the late 1980s, bands in the Japanese movement known as visual kei which includes many nonmetal groups emphasize elaborate costumes, hair, and makeup.
Iron Butterfly's debut album, released in early 1968, was titled Heavy.
In a 1995 interview on the PBS program Rock and Roll, he asserted that heavy metal was a term originated in a New York Times article reviewing a Jimi Hendrix performance, in which the author likened the event to listening to heavy metal falling from the sky.
This is the new soul music, the synthesis of white blues and heavy metal rock.
In the November 12, 1970, issue of Rolling Stone, he commented on an album put out the previous year by the British band Humble Pie Safe As Yesterday Is, their first American release, proved that Humble Pie could be boring in lots of different ways.
Creem critic Lester Bangs is credited with popularizing the term via his early 1970s essays on bands such as Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath.
In 1979, lead New York Times popular music critic John Rockwell described what he called heavy metal rock as brutally aggressive music played mostly for minds clouded by drugs, and, in a different article, as a crude exaggeration of rock basics that appeals to white teenagers.
Coined by Black Sabbath drummer, Bill Ward, downer rock was one of the earliest terms used to describe this style of music and was applied to such acts as Sabbath and Bloodrock.
For example, the 1983 Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock Roll includes this passage known for its aggressive blues based hard rock style, Aerosmith was the top American heavy metal band of the mid Seventies.
While heavy metal's quintessential guitar style, built around distortion heavy riffs and power chords, traces its roots to the late 1950s instrumentals of American Link Wray, the genre's direct lineage begins in the mid 1960s.
Bands like The Rolling Stones and The Yardbirds developed blues rock by recording covers of many classic blues songs, often speeding up the tempos.
As they experimented with the music, the UK blues based bands and the U.S. acts they influenced in turn developed what would become the hallmarks of heavy metal, in particular, the loud, distorted guitar sound.
The Kinks played a major role in popularizing this sound with their 1964 hit You Really Got Me. A significant contributor to the emerging guitar sound was the feedback facilitated by the new generation of amplifiers.
One of the most influential bands in forging the merger of genres was the British power trio Cream, who derived a massive, heavy sound from unison riffing between guitarist Eric Clapton and bassist Jack Bruce, as well as Ginger Baker's double bass drumming.
Hendrix's virtuosic technique would be emulated by many metal guitarists and the album's most successful single, Purple Haze, is identified by some as the first heavy metal hit.
That January, the San Francisco band Blue Cheer released a cover of Eddie Cochran's classic Summertime Blues, from their debut album Vincebus Eruptum, that many consider the first true heavy metal recording.
The same month, Steppenwolf released its self titled debut album, including Born to Be Wild, which refers to heavy metal in the lyrics.
In July, another two epochal records came out The Yardbirds' Think About It B side of the band's last single with a performance by guitarist Jimmy Page anticipating the metal sound he would soon make famous; and Iron Butterfly's In A Gadda Da Vida, with its 17 minute long title track, a prime candidate for first ever heavy metal album.
The Beatles' so called White Album, which also came out that month, included Helter Skelter, then one of the heaviest sounding songs ever released by a major band.
That same month, another Cream rooted trio led by Leslie West released Mountain, an album filled with heavy blues rock guitar and roaring vocals.
Black Sabbath had developed a particularly heavy sound in part due to an industrial accident guitarist Tony Iommi suffered before cofounding the band.
Deep Purple had fluctuated between styles in its early years, but by 1969 vocalist Ian Gillan and guitarist Ritchie Blackmore had led the band toward the developing heavy metal style.
That same year, two other British bands released debut albums in a heavy metal mode Uriah Heep with Very 'eavy...
The occult lyrics and imagery employed by Black Sabbath and Uriah Heep would prove particularly influential; Led Zeppelin also began foregrounding such elements with its fourth album, released in 1971.
The issue is not only one of shifting definitions, but also a persistent distinction between musical style and audience identification Ian Christe describes how the band became the stepping stone that led huge numbers of hard rock fans into heavy metal perdition.
In Christe's description, Black Sabbath's Though Judas Priest did not have a top 40 album in the U.S. until 1980, for many it was the definitive post Sabbath heavy metal band; its twin guitar attack, featuring rapid tempos and a nonbluesy, more cleanly metallic sound, was a major influence on later acts.
Objections were raised to metal's adoption of visual spectacle and other trappings of commercial artifice, but the main offense was its perceived musical and lyrical vacuity reviewing a Black Sabbath album in the early 1970s, leading critic Robert Christgau described it as dull and decadent...dim witted, amoral exploitation.
Punk rock emerged in the mid 1970s as a reaction against contemporary social conditions as well as what was perceived as the overindulgent, overproduced rock music of the time, including heavy metal.
With the major labels fixated on punk, many newer British heavy metal bands were inspired by the movement's aggressive, high energy sound and lo fi , do it yourself ethos.
Eddie Van Halen established himself as one of the leading metal guitar virtuosos of the era his solo on Eruption, from the band's self titled 1978 album, is considered a milestone.
Based on the clubs of L.A.'s Sunset Strip, bands such as Quiet Riot, Ratt, Mötley Crüe, and W.A.S.P. were influenced by traditional heavy metal of the earlier 1970s and incorporated the theatrics and sometimes makeup of glam rock acts such as Alice Cooper and Kiss.
The glam metal movement along with similarly styled acts such as New York's Twisted Sister became a major force in metal and the wider spectrum of rock music.
One of the seminal events in metal's growing popularity was the 1983 US Festival in California, where the heavy metal day featuring Ozzy Osbourne, Van Halen, Scorpions, Mötley Crüe, Judas Priest, and others drew the largest audiences of the three day event.
Thrash metal emerged in the early 1980s under the influence of hardcore punk and the New Wave of British Heavy Metal, particularly songs in the revved up style known as speed metal.
The sound developed by thrash groups was faster and more aggressive than that of the original metal bands and their glam metal successors.
While thrash began as an underground scene, and remained largely that for almost a decade, the leading bands in the movement began to reach a wider audience.
Metallica brought the sound into the top 40 of the Billboard album chart in 1986 with Master of Puppets; two years later, the band's ...And Justice for All hit number 6, while Megadeth and Anthrax had top 40 records.
In the UK, the related style of grindcore, led by bands such as Napalm Death and Extreme Noise Terror, emerged out of the anarcho punk movement.
Black metal varies considerably in style and production quality, although most bands emphasize shrieked and growled vocals, highly distorted guitars frequently played with rapid tremolo picking, a dark atmosphere and intentionally lo fi production, with ambient noise and background hiss.
Numerous black metal bands also experiment with sounds from all possible forms of metal, folk, classical music, electronica and avant garde.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Norway's Dimmu Borgir brought black metal closer to the mainstream, as did Cradle of Filth, which Metal Hammer calls England's most successful metal band since Iron Maiden.
The prototype for the sound was established in the mid to late 1980s by Germany's Helloween, which combined the power riffs, melodic approach, and high pitched, clean singing style of bands like Judas Priest and Iron Maiden with thrash's speed and energy, crystalliz ing the sonic ingredients of what is now known as power metal.
Traditional power metal bands like Sweden's HammerFall, England's DragonForce, and Florida's Iced Earth have a sound clearly indebted to the classic NWOBHM style.
Emerging in the mid 1980s with such bands as California's Saint Vitus, Maryland's The Obsessed, Chicago's Trouble, and Sweden's Candlemass, the doom metal movement rejected other metal styles' emphasis on speed, slowing its music to a crawl.
Doom metal traces its roots to the lyrical themes and musical approach of early Black Sabbath and Sabbath contemporaries such as Blue Cheer, Pentagram, and Black Widow.
The 1991 release of Forest of Equilibrium, the debut album by UK band Cathedral, helped spark a new wave of doom metal.
Early in the next decade, California's Kyuss and Sleep, inspired by the earlier doom metal bands, spearheaded the rise of stoner metal, while Seattle's Earth helped develop the drone metal subgenre.
The era of metal's mainstream dominance in North America came to an end in the early 1990s with the emergence of Nirvana and other grunge bands, signaling the popular breakthrough of alternative rock.
Grunge acts were influenced by the heavy metal sound, but rejected the excesses of the more popular metal bands, such as their flashy and virtuosic solos and appearance driven MTV orientation.
Glam metal fell out of favor due not only to the success of grunge, but also because of the growing popularity of the more aggressive sound typified by Metallica and the post thrash groove metal of Pantera and White Zombie.
A few new, unambiguously metal bands had commercial success during the first half of the decade Pantera's Far Beyond Driven topped the Billboard chart in 1994 but, In the dull eyes of the mainstream, metal was dead.
Like Jane's Addiction, many of the most popular early 1990s groups with roots in heavy metal fall under the umbrella term alternative metal.
Bands in Seattle's grunge scene such as Soundgarden, credited as making a place for heavy metal in alternative rock , and Alice in Chains were at the center of the alternative metal movement.
The label was applied to a wide spectrum of other acts that fused metal with different styles Faith No More combined their alternative rock sound with punk, funk, metal, and hip hop; Primus joined elements of funk, punk, thrash metal, and experimental music; Tool mixed metal and progressive rock; bands such as Fear Factory and Ministry began incorporating metal into their industrial sound, and vice versa, respectively; and Marilyn Manson went down a similar route, while also employing shock effects of the sort popularized by Alice Cooper.
In the mid and late 1990s came a new wave of U.S. metal groups inspired by the alternative metal bands and their mix of genres.
Dubbed nu metal , bands such as P.O.D., Korn, Papa Roach, Limp Bizkit, Slipknot, and Linkin Park incorporated elements ranging from death metal to hip hop, often including DJs and rap style vocals.
By 2004, melodic metalcore influenced as well by melodic death metal was popular enough that Killswitch Engage's The End of Heartache and Shadows Fall's The War Within debuted at numbers 21 and 20, respectively, on the Billboard album chart.
The success of these bands and others such as Trivium, which has released both metalcore and straight ahead thrash albums, and Mastodon, which plays in a progressive sludge style, has inspired claims of a metal revival in the United States, dubbed by some critics the New Wave of American Heavy Metal.
In Germany, Western Europe's largest music market, several continental metal bands placed multiple albums in the top 20 of the charts between 2003 and 2009, including the long running German thrash metal band Kreator, Finnish melodic death metal act Children of Bodom, Norwegian symphonic extreme metal group Dimmu Borgir, and two power metal bands, Germany's Blind Guardian and Sweden's HammerFall.
