In January 2006 the total installed electrical generating capacity from all forms of renewable energy was less than 2 GW, about a fifth of the total electrical production.
In 2005 the aim was for 18 of Scotland's electricity production to be generated by renewable sources by 2010, rising to 40 by 2020.
Wind turbines are the fastest growing of the renewable energy technologies in Scotland.
Most turbines in the EU produce electricity at an average of 25 of their rated maximum power due to the intermittency of wind resources, but Scotland's wind regime provides average of 40 or higher on the west and northern coasts.
It is estimated that 11.5 GW of onshore wind potential exists, enough to provide 45 TWh of energy.
The total offshore potential is estimated at 25 GW, which although more expensive to install, could be enough to provide almost half the total energy used in Scotland.
Various systems are under development at present aimed at harnessing the enormous potential available for wave power off Scotland's coasts.
Another approach is used by the LIMPET 500 Land Installed Marine Power Energy Transformer energy converter installed on the island of Islay by Wavegen Ltd. It is a shore based unit and generates power when waves run up the beach, creating pressure inside an inclined oscillating water column.
The funding is part of a new 13 million funding package for marine power projects in Scotland that will also support developments to Aquamarine's Oyster and Ocean Power Technology's PowerBuoy wave systems, AWS Ocean Energy's sub sea wave devices, ScotRenewables' 1.2 MW floating rotor device, Cleantechcom's tidal surge plans for the Churchill barriers between various Orkney islands, the Open Hydro tidal ring turbines, and further developments to the Wavegen system proposed for Lewis as well as a further 2.5 million for the European Marine Energy Centre EMEC based in Orkney.
This is a new Scottish Executive backed research facility that has installed a wave testing system at Billia Croo on the Orkney mainland and a tidal power testing station on the nearby island of Eday.
At the official opening of the Eday project the site was described as the first of its kind in the world set up to provide developers of wave and tidal energy devices with a purpose built performance testing facility.
Tidal stream power captures energy from the flow of tides, usually using underwater plant resembling a small wind turbine.
To date the only installed tidal power plant of any size is the 240 MW rated barrage scheme at the Rance Estuary in Brittany, which has been operating successfully for more than 25 years, although there are a number of other much smaller projects around the world.
In March 2010 a total of ten sites in the area, capable of providing an installed capacity of 1.2 GW of tidal and wave generation were leased out by the Crown Estates.
There is further potential for new pump storage schemes that would work well with intermittent sources of power such as wind and wave.
The production of hydro electricity has a long history in Scotland but given that the available catchment areas have practically all been exploited it is unlikely that there will be scope for the further development of significant amounts of new hydro generation.
Wood fuel almost certainly exceeds hydroelectric and wind as the largest source of renewable energy at present.
Scotland's forests, which currently make up 60 of the UK resource base, could provide up to 1 million tonnes of wood fuel per annum.
The biomass energy supply in Scotland could reach 450 MW or higher in coming years, predominantly from wood , with power stations requiring 4,500 5,000 oven dry tonnes per annum per megawatt of generating capacity.
The energy company E.ON has constructed a 44 MW biomass power station at Lockerbie using locally sourced crops while the smaller but not insignificant EPR Westfield power plant in Fife produces 9.8 MW of output using chicken litter as fuel.
The Forestry Commission are developing a Scottish Biomass Action Plan in conjunction with the Scottish Executive, and the latter is expected to provide a 7.5 million grant scheme to support biomass energy.
The Energy Savings Trust has estimated that micro generation could provide a significantly increased proportion of the UK's electricity demand by 2050 although only a fraction of this would come from renewable sources.
Small scale 'wind2heat' projects, which use wind turbines to power electrical storage heaters directly, have proven to be successful in remoter rural areas; as have various other local schemes such as air source heat pumps.
Caithness Heat and Power have announced plans to tackle fuel poverty in Wick by utilising a wood chip CHP scheme in partnership with the Old Pulteney Distillery.
In 2009 the Diageo Cameron Bridge distillery announced plans for a 65 million facility to generate energy from the spent wash created in the manufacturing process, which will aim to replace 95 of the plan's existing fossil fuel use.
The technology was developed in the 1970s and is well established with various installers in place such as Solar Power Scotland of Montrose, although AES Solar based in Forres who provided the panels for the Scottish Parliament building are Scotland's only manufacturer.
Most systems in Scotland provide heating through a ground source heat pump which brings energy to the surface via shallow pipe works.
Installation costs can vary from 7,000 to 10,000, and grants may be available from the Scottish Community and Householders Renewables Initiative operated by Community Energy Scotland for domestic properties up to a maximum of 4,000.
It is clear that if carbon emissions are to be reduced, a combination of increased production from renewables and decreased consumption of energy in general and fossil fuels in particular will be required.
A variety of other options exist, most of which may affect development of renewable technologies even if they are not means of producing energy from renewable sources themselves.
Various other ideas for renewable energy in the early stages of development, such as ocean thermal energy conversion, deep lake water cooling, and blue energy, have received little attention in Scotland, presumably because the potential is so significant for less speculative technologies.
The following technologies are means of reducing the effect of carbon emissions and form an important aspect of the energy debate in Scotland and are included here for completeness.
It is not a form of renewable energy production, although like carbon sequestration it offers a significant commercial challenge to renewable developments.
The PURE project on Unst in Shetland is a ground breaking training and research centre which uses a combination of the ample supplies of wind power and fuel cells to create a wind hydrogen system.
ITI Energy has attracted the Alterg project, a French company that is developing technology for the cost effective storage of hydrogen.
There is clearly a significant difference between a renewable energy production facility of modest size providing an island community with all its energy needs, and an industrial scale power station in the same location that is designed to export power to far distant urban locations.
Scotland, as a relatively sparsely populated country with significant renewable resources, is in a unique position to demonstrate how the transition to a low carbon, widely distributed energy economy may be undertaken.
Community Energy Scotland provides advice, grant funding and finance for renewable energy projects developed by community groups.
Numerous universities are playing a role in supporting energy research under the Supergen programme, including fuel cell research at St Andrews, marine technologies at Edinburgh, distributed power systems at Strathclyde and biomass crops at the UHI Millennium Institute's Orkney College.
This ground breaking scheme that may be the first of its kind in the world involves 'active network management' that will make better use of the existing infrastructure and allow a further 15MW of new 'non firm generation' output from renewables onto the network.
Scottish Southern Energy have been asked to provide for an export capacity of 40kWe. The aim is to help move the farm towards being powered by 100 renewable energy.
The following September, Scottish Power announced plans for two tidal projects in the same area, pending successful tests of a 6 million prototype.
In January 2009 the government announced the launch of a Marine Spatial Plan to map the potential of the Pentland Firth and Orkney coasts and agreed to take part in a working group examining options for an offshore grid to connect renewable energy projects in the North Sea to on shore national grids.
Thus, for example, individual wind turbines may have a 'capacity factor' of between 15 and 45 depending on their location, with a higher capacity factor giving a greater potential energy output for a given installed capacity.
The 'potential energy' column is thus an estimate based on a variety of assumptions including the installed capacity.
Although 'potential energy' is in some ways a more useful method of comparing the current output and future potential of different technologies, using it would require cumbersome explanations of all the assumptions involved in each example, so installed capacity figures are generally used.
