If Cao Cao were to have any hope of reuniting the sundered Han empire, he had to achieve naval control of the middle Yangtze and command the strategic naval base at Jiangling as a means of access to the southern region de Crespigny 2003 .
Two warlords controlled the regions of the Yangtze that were key to Cao Cao's success Liu Biao, Governor of Jing Province, controlled the river west of the mouth of the Han, roughly encompassing the area around the city of Xiakou and all territory south of that region.
A third ally, Liu Bei, was living in refuge with Liu Biao at the garrison in Fancheng modern Xiangfan , having fled from the northeast to the Jing Province following a failed plot to assassinate Cao Cao and restore power to the imperial dynasty de Crespigny 2007 480; de Crespigny 1969 258 .
The initial stages of the campaign were an unqualified success for Cao Cao, as the command of the Jing Province had been substantially weakened and the Jing armies exhausted by conflict with Sun Quan to the south de Crespigny 2007 486 .
Liu Bei's main advisor, Zhuge Liang, was sent to Chaisang 柴桑 to negotiate forming a mutual front against Cao Cao with the state of Wu de Crespigny 1969 263 .
He then assigned Zhou Yu, Cheng Pu, and Lu Su with 30,000 men to aid Liu Bei against Cao Cao de Crespigny 1996 .
Furthermore, this total included 70,000 impressed troops from the armies of the recently defeated Liu Biao, so the loyalty and morale of a large number of Cao Cao's force was uncertain Eikenberry 1994 60 .
The Battle of Red Cliffs unfolded in three stages an initial skirmish at Red Cliffs followed by a retreat to the Wulin battlefields on the northwestern bank of the Yangtze, a decisive naval engagement, and Cao Cao's disastrous retreat along Huarong Road.
The combined Sun Liu force sailed upstream from either Xiakou or Fankou to Red Cliffs, where they encountered Cao Cao's vanguard force.
Plagued by disease and low morale due to the series of forced marches they had undertaken on the prolonged Southern Campaign de Crespigny 2003 , Cao Cao's men could not gain an advantage in the small skirmish which ensued, so Cao Cao retreated to Wulin north of the Yangtze River and the allies pulled back to the south de Crespigny 2004 257 .
A combination of Cao Cao's strategic errors and the effectiveness of Huang Gai's ruse had resulted in the allied victory at the Battle of Red Cliffs.
Cao Cao's own thoughts regarding his failure at Red Cliffs suggest that he held his own actions and misfortunes responsible for the defeat, rather than the strategies utilised by his enemy during the battle ...it was only because of the sickness that I burnt my ships and retreated.
Sun Quan's troops had suffered far greater casualties than Liu Bei's in the extended conflict against Cao Ren following the Battle of Red Cliffs de Crespigny 2004 291 292 , and the death of Zhou Yu in 210 resulted in a drastic weakening of Sun Quan's strength in the Jing province de Crespigny 2004 297 .
Liu Bei also occupied the Jing province that Cao Cao had recently lost a strategic and naturally fortified area on the Yangtze River that Wu claimed for itself.
The Battle of Red Cliffs and the capture of Jing province by Liu Bei confirmed the separation of Southern China from the northern heartland of the Yellow River valley, and also foreshadowed a north south axis of hostility which would resonate for centuries de Crespigny 2004 260 .
For example, although modern Huarong city is located in Hunan, south of the Yangtze, in the 3rd century the city of that name was due east of Jiangling, considerably north of the Yangtze Zhang 2006 229; de Crespigny 2004 256 78n .
Moreover, one candidate site, Puqi 蒲圻 , was renamed Chibi City 赤壁市 in 1998 in a direct attempt to tie this location to the historical battlefield.
Historical records state that Cao Cao's forces retreated north across the Yangtze after the initial engagement at Red Cliffs, unequivocally placing the battle site on the south bank of the Yangtze.
Historical accounts also establish east and west boundaries for a stretch of the Yangtze which encompasses all possible sites for the battlefield.
Moreover, if the allied Sun Liu forces left from Xiakou rather than Fankou, as the oldest historical sources suggest, then the hill in Huangzhou would have been downstream from the point of departure, a possibility which cannot be reconciled with historical sources.
This would place the battlefield downstream from Puqi Chibi City , a view that is supported by scholars of Chinese history such as Rafe de Crespigny, Wang Li and Zhu Dongrun, following the Qing Dynasty historical document Shui Jing Zhu de Crespigny 2004 256 .
Sheng Honzhi's 5th century Jingzhou ji in particular places the Chibi battlefield a distance of 160 li approximately 80 kilometres 50 mi downstream from Wulin, but since the Paizhou and Luxikou meanders increased the length of the Yangtze River between Wuli and Wuchang by 100 li approximately 50 kilometres 31 mi ; see map some time in the Sui and Tang dynasties Zhang 2006 225 , later works do not regard Wuchang as a possible site.
The Shu kingdom in particular was viewed by later literati as the legitimate successor to the Han empire, so fictionalised accounts assign greater prominence than the historical records warrant to the roles of Liu Bei, Zhuge Liang and other heroes from Shu. This is generally accomplished by minimising the importance of Wu commanders and advisors such as Zhou Yu and Lu Su de Crespigny 2004 xi .
The fictionalised accounts also name Zhuge Liang as a military commander in the combined forces, which is not historically accurate de Crespigny 2004 260 264 .
