Gorgosaurus was smaller than Tyrannosaurus or Tarbosaurus, closer in size to Albertosaurus and Daspletosaurus.
Albertosaurus and Gorgosaurus share proportionally longer and lower skulls than Daspletosaurus and other tyrannosaurids.
Gorgosaurus teeth were typical of all known tyrannosaurids.
This number of teeth is similar to Albertosaurus and Daspletosaurus but is fewer than those of Tarbosaurus or Tyrannosaurus.
All other tyrannosaurid genera, including Daspletosaurus, Tarbosaurus and Tyrannosaurus, are classified in the subfamily Tyrannosaurinae.
The close similarities between Gorgosaurus libratus and Albertosaurus sarcophagus have led many experts to combine them into one genus over the years.
Canadian paleontologist Phil Currie claims there are as many anatomical differences between Albertosaurus and Gorgosaurus as there are between Daspletosaurus and Tyrannosaurus, which are almost always kept separate.
The holotype of Gorgosaurus libratus NMC 2120 is a nearly complete skeleton associated with a skull, discovered in 1913 by Charles M.
Prospectors from the American Museum of Natural History in New York City were active along the Red Deer River in Alberta at the same time, collecting hundreds of spectacular dinosaur specimens, including four complete G.
It was smaller than other Gorgosaurus specimens, with a lower, lighter skull and more elongate limb proportions.
Matthew and Brown noted that these features were characteristic of juvenile tyrannosaurids, but still described it as the holotype of a new species, G.
Dozens of other specimens have been excavated from the Dinosaur Park Formation and are housed in museums across the United States and Canada.
Several tyrannosaurid skeletons from the Judith River Formation of Montana probably belong to Gorgosaurus, although it remains uncertain whether they belong to G.
A complete skull of a small tyrannosaurid CMNH 7541 , found in the younger, late Maastrichtian age Hell Creek Formation of Montana, was named Gorgosaurus lancensis by Charles Whitney Gilmore in 1946.
In the Dinosaur Park Formation, Gorgosaurus lived alongside a rarer species of the tyrannosaurine Daspletosaurus.
However, a specimen of Daspletosaurus OTM 200 from the contemporaneous Two Medicine Formation of Montana preserves the digested remains of a juvenile hadrosaur in its gut region.
However, Gorgosaurus appears more common in northern formations like the Dinosaur Park, with species of Daspletosaurus more abundant to the south.
Examining five Gorgosaurus specimens of various sizes, Erickson calculated a maximum growth rate of about 110 kilograms 50 lb during the rapid growth phase, slower than in tyrannosaurines like Daspletosaurus and Tyrannosaurus, but comparable to Albertosaurus.
This, along with the complete lack of predators intermediate in size between huge adult tyrannosaurids and other small theropods, suggests these niches may have been filled by juvenile tyrannosaurids.
Other tyrannosaurids, including Albertosaurus, have been found in aggregations that some have suggested to represent mixed age packs, but there is no evidence of gregarious behavior in Gorgosaurus.
All known specimens of Gorgosaurus libratus have been recovered from the Dinosaur Park Formation in Alberta.
The Dinosaur Park Formation preserves a great wealth of vertebrate fossils.
Small predatory dinosaurs like oviraptorosaurs, troodonts and dromaeosaurs hunted smaller prey than the huge tyrannosaurids, Daspletosaurus and Gorgosaurus, which were two orders of magnitude larger in mass.
