Bryce Canyon's formations are the youngest known units in the Grand Staircase.
Conglomerate, siltstone, and fossil rich sandstone that together are up to 300 feet 90 m thick mark the arrival of the Cretaceous Seaway.
In the Bryce Canyon area this formation can be seen in the Paria Valley where it is found as a lithified blanket sand that probably accumulated on beaches, in lagoons, and vast coal producing swamps as the Cretaceous Seaway transgressed advanced inland over the region and later retreated.
The Cretaceous Seaway was already retreating east and to the south by the time the locally 1,700 feet 520 m thick Straight Cliffs Formation was deposited.
The cliff forming sandstone of the Tibbet Canyon Member was conformably deposited on top of the Tropic Shale in shallow marine and later near shore environments.
Shale and sandstone from the Smoky Hollow Member were deposited on top of its basal layer of coal rich mudstone in coastal swamps and lagoons on the shore of the seaway.
While the alternating layers of shale and sandstone mixed with massive coal deposits of the John Henry Member were laid down in swamps, lagoons and fluvial environments one member, the Drip Tank, is not found in the Bryce Canyon area.
Lakes and east flowing rivers became the dominant resting place for sediment following the retreat of the Cretaceous Seaway.
Two formations, the Canaan Peak and the Pine Hollow, sit on top of the Kaiparowits elsewhere in the region but are absent in the Bryce Canyon area.
The sandstones and conglomerates of these formations record stream and river deposition starting in the Paleocene epoch.
All of the Canaan Peak, Pine Hollow, Kaiparowits, and Waheap formations, along with part of the underlying Straight Cliffs, were removed from the anticline's crest by erosion before the Claron Formation was deposited.
These sediments were later lithified into the up to 700 feet 210 m thick Pink Member of the locally Eocene aged Claron Formation previously called the Wasatch Formation .
Channelized conglomerates of this member can be easily seen in Red Canyon along State Route 12 while its silt and mudstones compose most of the park's fragile and colorful spires called hoodoos.
Geologist Clarence Dutton called the iron oxide rich lower member of the Claron the Pink Cliffs series due to its colorful appearance.
These lakes existed from the Paleocene to mid Oligocene but did not spread to the Bryce Canyon area until Eocene time.
A gap in the geologic record following deposition of the Claron Formation was interrupted 34 to 31 mya by eruptions from the nearby Marysvale volcanic field, which is located northwest of the park.
Volcanic ash and lava from these flows are found less than 20 miles 30 km from Bryce Canyon but at least some volcanic material was likely deposited directly in the park area only to be later removed by erosion.
Basaltic rocks of the same age can be seen along the Sevier Fault near the entrance to Red Canyon; the dark colored volcanic rocks have been displaced by the fault some 900 feet 300 m and are now in direct contact with the much older Claron Formation.
Formation of approximately the current depth of the Colorado River's Grand Canyon by 1.2 mya further caused its tributaries to cut down even deeper.
The Pink Member of the Claron Formation is largely composed of easily eroded and relatively soft limestone.
In the case of Bryce Canyon, the hoodoos' rate of erosion is 2 4 feet 0.6 1.3 m every 100 years.
As the canyon continues to erode to the west it will eventually capture in perhaps 3 million years the watershed of the East Fork of the Sevier River.
