Selwood received an array of accolades and honours as a bottom aged player, winning mid year State honours for Victoria Country in the AFL National Championships.
Selwood's achievements in local football were recognised when he was listed as a finalist in the 2006 Bendigo Sports Star of the Year Award.
Rewarded with the captaincy of Bendigo for his final season, Selwood again won mid year State honours for Victoria Country.
In front of nearly 80,000 spectators, Selwood amassed 22 disposals, five marks, five clearances, six inside 50s, five tackles, and five score assists, helping Geelong to a club finals record 106 point victory.
With 18 disposals, five marks, five clearances the most of any Geelong player seven inside 50s, four tackles, and an equal game high four score assists, Selwood helped the Cats to a record 119 point win.
At 19 years of age, Selwood became the youngest person to play in a winning Grand Final team in 10 years.
He was also the first to win the AFL Rising Star Award and play in a premiership side within the same season, making him one of the most accomplished first year players in league history.
Selwood finished the season ranked first among all first year players in several major statistical categories; total possessions 405 , disposals per game 19.3 , kicks 216 , handpasses 189 , marks 109 , tackles 94 the most ever by any first year AFL player and tackles per game 4.5 .
Selwood added to his list of first year honours at season's end with the Geelong Football Club Best First Year Player Award, along with a top 20 placing in the Club Champion award.
Selwood continued to establish himself as a key player in the Geelong midfield during the 2008 AFL season, helping the Cats achieve a record equalling 21 win season and secure the McClelland Trophy for the second successive year.
Selwood also polled 19 votes in the Brownlow Medal, awarded to the best and fairest player in the AFL, to place fifth overall, and second among his teammates.
Selwood's consistency and performances over his first two seasons was also recognised by the AFL Coaches Association, who awarded him the Best Young Player Award.
Selwood's performance in the final, during which he gathered 29 disposals including a team high nine contested possessions six marks, six tackles, and six inside 50s, were recognised as he placed fourth in Norm Smith Medal voting for best afield in the Grand Final.
Selwood's year, during which he averaged more than 25 disposals, 4 marks, and 4 tackles per game, was also rewarded with a top five finish in the Carji Greeves Medal Geelong's Best and Fairest .
After the 2008 Grand Final loss ended Geelong's previous season, Selwood and his teammates began their 2009 campaign by capturing the pre season NAB Cup for the second time in four years.
In round five, Selwood made his 50th senior appearance, setting a new VFL AFL record for the highest percentage of wins inside 50 games.
In addition, Selwood's 50th appearance coincided with the club's own record setting effort for the most successful 50 game stretch in VFL AFL history.
Selwood matched a career high in finals games with 29 disposals and 9 marks during the Cats 73 point win over Collingwood, leading the club to their third successive Grand Final appearance.
Selwood finished the game with 24 disposals including a team high 12 contested possessions and equal game high 16 handpasses 4 marks, 6 clearances, a team high 10 first possessions, 3 tackles, and 1 goal to help the Cats record a 12 point win and secure their second premiership in three seasons.
After averaging 28 disposals and 5 tackles per game over the course of the season, Selwood was also awarded with All Australian honours for the first time in his career and a second successive top five placing for the Carji Greeves Medal.
Selwood finished the year ranked fourth in the league for total disposals 691 , third for total handpasses 389 , second for contested possessions 236 and eighth for hard ball gets.
For the second successive season, he also led the league for total free kicks earned 59 and finished the year ranked within the top five at Geelong in several major statistical categories.
During his first three seasons at Geelong, Selwood's all around ability to contribute as an attacking inside or outside midfielder has been highlighted by his regular ranking among the top five at the club for total disposals, clearances, first possessions, contested possessions, uncontested possessions, tackles, inside 50s, and score assists.
