The remains of British Iron Age farms have been found at Chapel Lane, a site now protected as a public open space by the district and parish councils and supported by Navenby Archaeology Group.
Significant Roman finds include parts of shops and houses that would have fronted onto Ermine Street, down which Roman armies marched to and from the Legionary Fortress at Lincoln.
Late Saxon remains have also been found under and around St Peter's Church, suggesting the original Roman village had moved from Ermine Street to Church Lane and North Lane by the late Saxon period.
The Vikings exerted considerable influence over Lincolnshire in the 9th and 10th centuries, as can be seen in the many local place names ending in by.
Navenby, originally an agricultural village, became a market town after receiving a charter from Edward the Confessor in the 11th century.
Such was the significance of Navenby at this time that a workhouse for the parish poor was erected here, although the building was later given over to other uses.
Following the 1834 Poor Law Amendment Act Navenby parish became part of the Lincoln Poor Law Union.
When the market closed in the early 19th century Navenby lost its status as a market town, and once again became an agricultural village.
The Penny Cyclopaedia of 1839, published by The Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, described the village in this way Many buildings were erected in Navenby during the 19th century, including a small Wesleyan Methodist chapel in about 1830, which was completely rebuilt in 1840.
The Provincial Gas Light and Coke Company began supplying gas lighting to the village in 1857, and in 1867 a railway station was built three quarters of a mile 1.2 km west of the village, on the Lincoln to Grantham branch of the Great Northern Railway.
Navenby was an agricultural village at the beginning of the 20th century, but the outbreak of the First World War brought changes for the community.
On it are inscribed the names of the 22 casualties from the First World War and the 8 from the Second World War. Following an initial decline in the population of Navenby at the turn of the 20th century, the post war years saw numbers rise steeply.
Although Navenby continues to be surrounded by farms, it is now largely a dormitory village for Lincoln, Grantham and beyond.
The parish of Navenby was originally in the higher division of the ancient Boothby Graffoe wapentake, in the North Kesteven division of the county of Lincolnshire.
The History of the County of Lincoln, a book written by Thomas Allen in 1834, states Navenby was classed as an ancient parish from the 11th to the 19th century, as it came under the jurisdiction of a clergyman and existed before 1597.
The ecclesiastical parish of Navenby was originally placed in the Longoboby Rural Deanery, but was transferred to the Graffoe Rural Deanery in 1968, and it is still part of the Diocese of Lincoln.
Navenby officially became a civil parish in the 19th century and became a member of the Lincoln Poor Law Union in 1834.
Following the Local Government Act 1888, Navenby was governed by Branston Rural District Council from 1894 1931.
The village then came under the control of North Kesteven Rural District Council from 1931 1974, after the Local Government Act 1972 reformed the districts of Holland, Kesteven and much of Lindsey into the shire county of Lincolnshire.
Today Navenby remains part of the North Kesteven district.
Before the 1832 Reform Act, Lincolnshire sent twelve members to parliament, including two for the county, two for the city of Lincoln and two for the boroughs of Boston, Grantham, Great Grimsby and Stamford.
Today, Navenby has its own parish council, dealing with issues such as play area revamps and the protection of public open spaces.
The council is based at High Street, Navenby.
The second tier of local government provided for Navenby is the Conservative controlled North Kesteven District Council, which is responsible for housing problems and public health.
Conservative controlled Lincolnshire County Council provides the top tier of local government for Navenby, with responsibility for highways, sites of special interest and schools.
The civil parish of Navenby straddles the old Roman Ermine Street, known locally as High Dyke.
Lying 8.7 miles 14 km south of Lincoln and 8.9 miles 14.3 km north northwest of Sleaford, Navenby enjoys warm summers and dry frosty winters.
The district surrounding Navenby North Kesteven remains a relatively inexpensive place to purchase property.
A 2004 Housing Needs Study, carried out by Fordham Associates for North Kesteven District Council, highlighted the need for 460 affordable homes to be built each year for the next five years in Navenby and the surrounding villages.
The street includes a mix of 18th century cottages, Victorian properties, Grade II listed farm buildings and 20th century homes.
The road was named for the village church, St Peter's, which is located here, as is a former village school, now a private house.
The people of Navenby enjoy a high employment rate, although most work outside the village.
Navenby was originally an agricultural village, with most people living off the land or trading goods in the local market.
The village does, however, offer some work opportunities, with the High Street lined with shops, fast food stores and public houses.
Nearby Lincoln offers a wider variety of work, with its economy based mainly on public administration, commerce, arable farming and tourism.
The centre of Navenby village is a designated conservation area; many of the stone and brick built houses date back hundreds of years.
The old pig sty and storage shed, deemed beyond repair, were demolished and the bricks used to construct a purpose built visitor centre, used for exhibitions about Navenby and the local area.
Navenby can also be reached from the A15 road, which runs past the end of Green Man Lane and links Lincoln with Sleaford.
Navenby once had its own railway station, built in 1867 as part of the Lincoln to Grantham branch of the Great Northern Railway.
Today, the closest stations to Navenby are Lincoln, Sleaford, Grantham and Newark North Gate.
Grantham and Newark are both part of the high speed London to Scotland East Coast Main Line; Lincoln and Sleaford are branch line stations.
The main service is provided by the Stagecoach travel company, which runs the Number 1 service from Lincoln to Grantham, via Navenby, along the A607 every 30 minutes, from 7 am until 7 pm, every day except Sunday.
The same Number 1 service runs in the opposite direction too, from Grantham to Lincoln via Navenby, every 30 minutes each day except Sunday.
This is a mixed comprehensive school named after Field Marshal William Robertson, who was born in Welbourn and served in the First World War. Other senior schools within a 10 mile 16 km radius include Branston Community College, and two grammar schools in nearby Sleaford Carre's Grammar School for boys and Kesteven and Sleaford High School for girls.
Many local senior schools offer sixth form tuition, and further education courses for students aged 16 and over are also provided by Lincoln College, which is the largest educational institution in Lincolnshire.
The Grade II listed 18th century King's Head is probably the oldest public house in the village; the nearby Lion and Royal dates from 1824 and is also Grade II listed.
The pentagram includes the nearby villages of Temple Bruer which has strong connections with the Knights Templar of the 12th century as well as Wellingore and Harmston.
Although the A607 trunk road passes through Navenby, the village can also be accessed from the haunted A15, which runs past the end of Green Man Lane.
The East Midlands Ambulance Service NHS Trust operates ambulances in the Navenby area, and the village is also covered by The Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire Air Ambulance, based at nearby Royal Air Force Waddington on the edge of Waddington village.
Navenby villager Tracey Duxbury is a member of the Lady Imps team, the women's team attached to Lincoln City.
Other clubs include Navenby Archaeology Group, which aims to uncover the village's extensive historic past.
