In response to Andrew Jackson's plea for volunteers to fight the British in the War of 1812, Bowie and his brother Rezin enlisted in the Louisiana militia in late 1814.
The war ended on December 24 of that year with the signing of the Treaty of Ghent, and the Bowie brothers arrived in New Orleans too late to participate in the fighting.
When the United States purchased the Louisiana Territory in 1803, it promised to honor all former land grant claims, and for the next 20 years efforts were made to establish who owned what land.
The Arkansas Superior Court received 126 claims in late 1827 from residents who claimed to have purchased land in former Spanish grants from the Bowie brothers.
Wright's friends intervened and stopped the attack, after which Bowie resolved to carry his hunting knife at all times.
After recovering from the wounds he suffered in the Sandbar Fight, in 1828 Bowie decided to move to Texas, at that time a state in the Mexican federation.
At the time the city, known as Bexar, had a population of 2,500 people, mostly of Mexican descent, and Bowie's fluency in Spanish helped him establish himself in the area.
The Mexican government passed laws in 1834 and 1835 that stopped much of the land speculation.
It was believed that after the Mexican citizens left the area, the Lipan Apaches took over the mines.
After obtaining permission from the Mexican government to mount an expedition into Indian territory to search for the legendary silver mine, Bowie, his brother Rezin, and nine others set out for San Saba on November 2, 1831.
The citizens of San Antonio believed the members of the Bowie expedition must have perished, and Ursula Bowie began wearing widow's weeds.
To the surprise of the town, the surviving members of the group returned to San Antonio on December 6.
In response to the rumblings, Mexican troops established military posts in several locations within the province, including San Antonio de Béxar.
Anglo colonists in Texas supported Santa Anna and General José Antonio Mexía, who led soldiers into Texas to oust commanders loyal to Bustamante.
After hearing that the Mexican army commander in Nacogdoches, José de las Piedras, had demanded that all residents in his area surrender their arms, Bowie cut short a visit to Natchez in July 1832 to return to Texas.
Before the group reached the building housing the town officials, they were attacked by a force of 100 Mexican cavalry.
After a second battle in which Piedras lost 33 men, the Mexican army evacuated during the night.
Bowie later served as a delegate to the Convention of 1833, which formally requested that Texas become its own state within the Mexican federation.
Fearing the disease would reach San Antonio, Bowie sent his pregnant wife and their daughter to the family estate in Monclova in the company of her parents and brother.
The following year the Mexican government passed new laws allowing land sale in Texas, and Bowie returned to land speculation.
His appointment ended in May 1835, when President Antonio López de Santa Anna abolished the Coahuila y Tejas government and ordered the arrest of all Texians including Bowie doing business in Monclova.
Bowie was forced to flee Monclova and return to the Anglo areas of Texas.
Bowie visited several Indian villages in East Texas in an attempt to convince the reluctant tribes to fight against the Mexican government.
Santa Anna responded to the rumblings by ordering large numbers of Mexican troops to Texas.
Austin formed an army of 500 men to march on the Mexican forces in San Antonio with the cannon that had precipitated the fight.
The scouting party left with 92 men, many of them members of the New Orleans Grays who had just arrived in Texas.
After discovering a good defensive position near Mission Concepción, the group requested that Austin's army join them.
On the foggy morning of October 28, Mexican General Domingo Ugartechea led a force of 300 infantry and cavalry soldiers and 2 small cannons against the Texian forces.
An hour after the battle ended, Austin arrived with the rest of the Texian army to begin a siege of San Antonio de Béxar, where General Martín Perfecto de Cós, the overall commander of Mexican forces in Texas, and his troops were garrisoned.
As they returned to San Antonio, Bowie took 60 mounted men to intercept the party, which they believed carried valuable cargo.
At the end of the fight, the Texians had two wounded men, but had captured many horses and mules.
In the ensuing fighting, the Texians suffered only a few casualties, while the Mexican army lost many troops to death and desertion.
Cós surrendered and returned to Mexico, taking with him the last Mexican troops in Texas.
Believing the war was over, many of the Texian volunteers left the army and returned to their families.
After Houston received word that Santa Anna was leading a large force to San Antonio, Bowie offered to lead volunteers to defend the Alamo from the expected attack.
Through Bowie's connections because of his marriage and his fluency in Spanish, the predominantly Mexican population of San Antonio often furnished him with information about the movements of the Mexican army.
After learning that Santa Anna had 4,500 troops and was heading for the city, Bowie wrote several letters to the provisional government asking for help in defending the Alamo, especially men, money, rifles, and cannon powder .
On February 3, William Travis arrived with an additional 30 troops, and several days later Davy Crockett appeared with twelve Tennesseans.
Neill went on furlough on February 17 to visit his sick family, leaving Travis, a member of the regular army, in command.
Santa Anna and his army reached the outskirts of San Antonio de Bexar several days later and began a siege of the Alamo on February 24.
According to the reporter's version of Rose's account, when Travis realized that the Mexican army would likely prevail, he drew a line in the sand and asked those willing to die for the cause to cross the line.
Santa Anna ordered the alcalde of San Antonio, Francisco Antonio Ruiz, to confirm the identities of Bowie, Travis, and Crockett.
After first ordering that Bowie be buried, as he was too brave a man to be burned like a dog, Santa Anna later had Bowie's body placed with those of the other Texians on the funeral pyre.
A newspaper article claimed that a Mexican soldier saw Bowie carried from his room on his cot, alive, after the conclusion of the battle.
The soldier maintained that Bowie verbally castigated a Mexican officer in fluent Spanish, and the officer ordered Bowie's tongue cut out and his still breathing body thrown onto the funeral pyre.
Although Bowie's name and his knife were well known during his lifetime, his legend grew after October 1852, when DeBow's Review published an article written by his brother John Jones Bowie, called Early Life in the Southwest The Bowies.
From 1956 1958, Bowie was the subject of a television show, The Adventures of Jim Bowie, which was primarily set in 1830s Louisiana, although later episodes ventured into the Mexican province of Texas.
