Both the Republic of Texas and the Texas State Legislature also set aside public lands for a future college.
The Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas, known as Texas A.M.C., was established by the state legislature on April 17, 1871 as the state's first public institution of higher education.
The legislature provided US 75,000 for the construction of buildings at the new school, and state leaders invested profits from the sale of 180,000 acres 730 km2 received under the Land Grant College Act in gold frontier defense bonds, creating a permanent endowment for the college.
Only men were admitted, and all students were required to participate in the Corps of Cadets and receive military training.
Enrollment, which had climbed as high as 500 students, declined to only 80 students in 1883, the year the University of Texas opened in Austin, Texas.
Although the Texas Constitution specified that the Agricultural and Mechanical College was to be a branch of a proposed University of Texas, the Austin school was established with a separate Board of Regents.
The two Texas schools quickly began to battle over the limited funds that the state legislature made available for higher education.
Many residents of the state saw little need for two colleges in Texas, and some wanted to close the agricultural and mechanical school.
Texas A.M.C. president Lawrence Sullivan Ross, known affectionately to students as Sully , is credited for saving the school from closure and transforming it into a respected military institution.
Five years later the state legislature, in cooperation with the United States Department of Agriculture, established the Texas Agricultural Extension Service, organized the Texas Forest Service, and authorized a School of Veterinary Medicine at the college.
The college was unprepared for the growth, and for the next ten years several hundred students lived in tents in a field in the middle of campus.
In early September 1918, the entire senior class was mustered into military service, with plans to send the younger students at staggered dates throughout the next year.
The first graduate school was organized in 1924, and, in 1925, Mary Evelyn Crawford Locke became the first female to receive a diploma from Texas A M, although she was not allowed to participate in the graduation ceremony.
At the time, the college was still an all male military school with a 7,500 student enrollment.
Within several years of his arrival, the 58th Legislature of Texas officially changed the name of the school from the A M College of Texas to Texas A M University.
The wives and daughters of faculty, staff and students as well as female staff members were finally allowed to officially participate in undergraduate programs, although they were not permitted to join the Corps of Cadets.
The following year the college was officially integrated as A M welcomed its first African American student.
The same year the Board voted to allow any woman, not just those connected to students and professors, to attend the university.
Courtney of Dallas became the first African American to receive an undergraduate degree from Texas A M University.
He remained at Texas A M and, in 1970, became the first African American to receive a D.V.M. degree from the College of Veterinary Medicine.
When Rudder died in 1970, after 11 years as president of the school, Texas A M University had grown to more than 14,000 students from all 50 states and 75 nations.
On September 17, 1971, Texas A M University was one of the first four institutions to be designated a sea grant college in recognition of oceanographic development and research.
The university remains one of few institutions nationwide to hold designations as a land , sea , and space grant college.
In November 1976, the university denied official recognition to the Gay Student Services Organization on the grounds that homosexuality was illegal in Texas, and the group's stated goals offering referral services and providing educational information to students were actually the responsibility of university staff.
To coincide with the opening of the George Bush Presidential Library, Texas A M established the George Bush School of Government and Public Service.
A commission put together by Texas A M University discovered that a number of factors led to the Bonfire collapse, including excessive internal stresses on the logs and inadequate containment strength , where the wiring used to tie the logs together was not strong enough.
Texas A M officials, Bonfire student leaders, and the university itself were the subject of several lawsuits by parents of the students injured or deceased in the collapse.
Gates succeeded Bowen in 2002, and during his four year tenure as president, Vision 2020's short term focus narrowed to four key steps Gates' leadership resulted in the largest academic expansion in the university's history.
