When contributions and loan repayments dropped off in 1855 after a poor harvest in Utah, President Young decided to begin using handcarts because the Latter day Saints who remained in Europe were mostly poor.
Emigrants departed from an English port generally Liverpool and travelled by ship to New York or Boston, then by railroad to Iowa City, Iowa, the western terminus of the rail line, where they would be outfitted with handcarts and other supplies.
The emigrants spent several weeks in Iowa City, where they constructed their handcarts and were outfitted with supplies before beginning their trek of about 1,300 miles 2,093 km .
About 815 emigrants from the first two ships were organized into the first three handcart companies, headed by captains Edmund Ellsworth, Daniel D.
The emigrant companies included many children and elderly individuals, and pushing and pulling handcarts was difficult work.
Journal entries reflect the optimism of the handcart pioneers, even amid their hardships The first two companies arrived in Salt Lake City on September 26 and the third followed less than a week later.
The ship Thornton, carrying the emigrants who became the Willie Company, did not leave England until May 4.
Another three weeks passed before the Horizon, carrying the emigrants who formed the Martin Company, departed.
Emigrant John Chislett describes the problems with the carts Prior to the Willie Company departing Florence, the company met to debate the wisdom of such a late departure.
Some members of the company, perhaps as many as 100, decided to spend the winter in Florence or in Iowa, but the majority, about 404 in number including Savage continued the journey west.
Richards, returning from Europe where he had served as the Church's mission president, passed the emigrant companies.
Richards and the 12 returning missionaries who accompanied him, traveling in carriages and light wagons pulled by horses and mules, pressed on to Utah to obtain assistance for the emigrants.
On October 4 the Richards party reached Salt Lake City and conferred with president Brigham Young and other Church leaders.
The next morning the Church was meeting in a general conference, where Young and the other speakers called on the Church members to provide wagons, mules, supplies, and teamsters for a rescue mission.
On the morning of October 7 the first rescue party left Salt Lake City with 16 wagonloads of food and supplies, pulled by four mule teams with 27 young men serving as teamsters and rescuers.
The members of the Willie Company had just reached the end of their flour supplies.
On October 20 Captain Willie and Joseph Elder went ahead by mule through the snow to locate the supply train and inform them of the company's desperate situation.
They arrived at the rescue party's campsite near South Pass that evening, and by the next evening the rescue party reached the Willie Company and provided them with food and assistance.
On October 23, the second day after the main rescue party had arrived, the Willie Company faced the most difficult section of the trail the ascent up Rocky Ridge.
On October 19, the Martin Company was about 110 miles 177 km further east, making its last crossing of the North Platte River near present day Casper, Wyoming.
Meanwhile the original scouting party continued eastward until it reached a small vacant fort at Devil's Gate, where they had been instructed to wait for the rest of the rescue party if they had not found the Martin Company.
The Martin company remained in their camp at Red Bluffs for nine days until the three scouts finally arrived on October 28.
Three days later the main rescue party met the Martin Company and the Hodgett and Hunt wagon companies and helped them on to Devil's Gate.
Grant, who headed the rescue party, reported to President Young At Devil's Gate the rescue party unloaded the baggage carried in the wagons of the Hodgett and Hunt wagon companies that had been following the Martin Company so the wagons could be used to transport the weakest emigrants.
Taylor spent much of the day pulling the carts and carrying many of the emigrants across the river.
The rescue parties escorted the emigrants from both companies to Utah through more snow and severe weather while their members continued to suffer death from disease and exposure.
The Willie Company arrived in Salt Lake City on November 9; 68 members of the company had lost their lives.
Meanwhile, a backup relief party of 77 teams and wagons was making its way east to provide additional assistance to the Martin Company.
After passing Fort Bridger the leaders of the backup party concluded that the Martin Company must have wintered east of the Rockies, so they turned back.
When word of the returning backup relief party was communicated to Young, he ordered the courier to return and tell them to turn back east and continue until they found the handcart company, but several days had been lost.
The 104 wagons carrying the Martin Company arrived in Salt Lake City on November 30; at least 145 members of the company had lost their lives.
American West historian, Wallace Stegner, described the inadequate planning and improvident decisions leading to the tragedy when he wrote, As early as November 2, 1856, while the Willie and Martin companies were still making their way to safety, Brigham Young responded to criticism of his own leadership by rebuking Franklin Richards and Daniel Spencer for allowing the companies to leave so late.
The emigrants were now able to travel by rail to Saint Joseph, Missouri, after which they went by riverboat to Florence where they were outfitted with handcarts and supplies.
Three days later wagons from Utah carrying provisions finally rescued the famished emigrants.
Arthur King Peters described the importance of this part of Mormon history in Seven Trails West Wallace Stegner praised the examples of those of the handcart companies, particularly in comparison to other pioneer parties Reenactments, in which a group dressed in 19th century garb travels for one or more days pushing and pulling handcarts, have become a popular activity among LDS wards, youth groups, and families.
