Vegetation and game in the region was similar to what is there today by the time people started to settle Yosemite Valley 3000 years ago.
In the 11th or 12th century a band of indigenous people who called the valley that provided them with nuts, berries, and small game Ahwahnee meaning place of a gaping mouth moved into the valley.
Displaced Native Americans from the coast of California moved to the Sierra Nevada in the early to mid 19th century.
The part of the Sierra Nevada where the park is located was long considered to be a physical barrier to non indigenous settlers, traders, trappers, and travelers.
Travel and trade activity dramatically increased in the area, competing with the local Native Americans and destroying resources they depended upon.
In 1863 67, the California Geological Survey surveyed parts of Yosemite's high country and the boundary of the new state park.
James Savage was running a mining operation and trading camp on the Merced River 10 miles 16 km west of Yosemite Valley by 1850.
On Thursday March 27 of that year the company of 50 to 60 men reached what is now called Old Inspiration Point and saw the major features of the Valley laid out before them they named the overlook Mt. Beatitude .
Attached to Savage's unit was Dr. Lafayette Bunnell, the company physician who later wrote about his awestruck impressions of the valley in The Discovery of the Yosemite.
While camped at Bridalveil Meadow Bunnell suggested that the Valley be named ' Yo sem ity , after what the surrounding Sierra Miwok tribes, who feared the Yosemite Valley tribe, called them.
Others in the company were also moved by what they saw and recounted their journey to friends and family after they returned, increasing interest in the Valley and surrounding area.
In Summer or early Fall of 1853, the Ahwahneechee apparently returned to the Valley, but later betrayed the hospitality of their former Mono hosts by stealing some horses that the Mono had taken from non indigenous ranchers.
Hostilities then subsided, and by the mid 1850s local non indigenous residents started to befriend Native Americans living in the Yosemite area.
As older tribe members died, younger ones tended to favor non traditional housing provided by the National Park Service.
A few Paiute and Miwok families still live in the Valley and are employed by the Park Service.
After returning to Mariposa Hutchings wrote an article about his experience which appeared in the July 12, 1855 issue of the Mariposa Gazette and was later published in various forms nationally.
, Ayres' sketch of Yosemite Falls was published in fall that year, and four of his drawings were presented in the lead article of the July 1856 and initial issue of Hutchings' Illustrated California Magazine.
These were the first known accurate pictures of Yosemite Valley.
Ayres returned in 1856 and visited Tuolumne Meadows in the area's high country.
He visited Yosemite many times and photographed Muir, Galen Clark, George Fiske, and Teddy Roosevelt.
In 1856, Milton and Houston Mann 2 of 42 tourists to visit the valley the year before finished a toll road to the Valley that traveled up the South Fork of the Merced River.
Settler Galen Clark discovered the Mariposa Grove of Giant Sequoia in Wawona in 1856; a year later he completed a bridge over the South Fork Merced in Wawona for traffic inbound to the Valley.
Visitation and interest in Yosemite continued through the American Civil War. A Unitarian minister named Thomas Starr King visited the Valley in 1860 and saw some of the negative effects that homesteading and commercial activity were having on the area.
King went on to become the first person with a nationally recognized voice to call for a public Yosemite park.
Frederick Law Olmsted, the United States' most widely respected landscape architect, became interested by Kings' warnings and visited Yosemite Valley and the Mariposa Grove in 1863.
Senator John Conness of California introduced a Park bill in 1864 to the United States Senate that would cede Yosemite Valley and the Mariposa Grove to California.
Yosemite Valley and the Mariposa Grove were ceded to California as a state park for public use, resort and recreation.
Josiah Whitney, the first director of the California Geological Survey, lamented that Yosemite Valley may become like what Niagara Falls was at the time a tourist trap where proprietary interests place tolls on every bridge, path, trail, and viewpoint.
Two years after losing his land, Hutchings published a second Yosemite guide, Hutchings' Tourist Guide to the Yosemite Valley and the Big Tree Groves.
Under Clark's on and off stewardship through 1896, access to the park by tourists improved, and conditions in the Valley were made more hospitable to humans.
A road to Glacier Point was completed in 1882 by John Conway, and the Great Sierra Wagon Road was opened in 1883 roughly following the Mono Trail to Tuolumne Meadows .
Tourists transferred from the railway to stagecoaches that traveled through Merced Canyon to reach Yosemite Valley.
Clark and the reigning commissioners were ousted in 1880 by the California Legislature and Hutchings became the new park guardian.
Scotland born naturalist John Muir first came to California in March 1868 and immediately set out for the Yosemite area.
His wish was partially answered on October 1, 1890 when the area outside the valley and sequoia grove became a national park under the un opposed Yosemite Act. The Act withdrew these lands from settlement, occupancy, or sale and protected all timber, mineral deposits, natural curiosities or wonders along with prohibiting wanton destruction of the fish and game and their capture or destruction for the purposes of merchandise or profit .
It is important to note, that Yosemite National Park does include the entire upper drainages of two separate river watersheds which was very important to Muir who said you cannot save Yosemite Valley without saving its Sierran fountains.
. The State of California, however, retained control of the Valley and Grove.
Muir and 181 others founded the Sierra Club in 1892, in part to lobby for the transfer of the Valley and Grove into the National Park.
Like Yellowstone National Park before it, Yosemite was at first administered by the United States Army.
A major problem facing the Cavalry were the approximately 100,000 sheep that were illegally led into Yosemite's high meadows by shepherds each year.
Galen Clark retired as the state park's guardian in 1896, leaving the Valley and Grove under ineffective stewardship.
Long a proponent of creating a unified Yosemite national park, Muir and his Sierra Club continued to lobby the government and influential people for the creation of a unified Yosemite National Park.
In an effort to make the remote area more accessible, the Sierra Club began organizing annual trips to Yosemite, starting in 1901 a practice that continues to the present day .
The LeConte Memorial Lodge is a National Historic Landmark built in 1902 as an education center in honor of Joseph LeConte, a University of California geologist who died in Yosemite Valley the year before.
Then in May 1903, Theodore Roosevelt who was then President of the United States camped with John Muir near Glacier Point for three days.
On that trip, Muir convinced Roosevelt to take control of the Valley and the Grove away from California and give it to the federal government.
In 1906 Roosevelt signed a bill that did precisely that, and the Superintendent's headquarters was moved from the Wawona area to Yosemite Valley.
About 12,000 acres 4,900 ha between Tuolumne and Merced big tree groves was added to the park in 1930 through land purchases by the federal government and matching funds provided by John D.
The National Park Service was formed in 1916 and Yosemite was transferred to that agency's jurisdiction with W.B. Lewis as superintendent.
Stephen Mather, the first director of the Park Service, built the Ranger's Club at his own expense in 1920 to house Yosemite rangers.
A flood, reduced lumber and mining extraction, and greatly increased automobile and bus use forced the Yosemite Valley Railway out of business in 1945.
Starting in 1920, the groundwork for interpretive programs and services in national parks was laid in Yosemite by Harold C.
Hall pioneered the idea of having park museums act as public contact centers and general headquarters for interpretive programs a model followed by all later national parks in the United States and widely adapted internationally as well.
Yosemite Museum, the first permanent museum in the National Park System, was completed in 1926.
The Ahwahnee Hotel, built in 1927 in Yosemite Valley, is a luxury hotel decorated in Native American motifs.
Yosemite National Park has had 11 winter floods since 1916 that have caused substantial damage to property.
Some structures in the Old Village, such as the historic 1858 Cedar Cottage, then the oldest building in Yosemite Valley, were demolished even though they weren't flooded.
The broader tensions in American society were felt in Yosemite in 1970, when a large number of youths gathered in the park over the summer.
Tule elk, which were near extinction, were housed in a pen in Yosemite before being moved to the Owens Valley in eastern California.
The Park Service has also prohibited driving and camping in meadows, which was a common practice in the 1910s to 1930s.
This goal was not met but flooding in January 1997 destroyed park infrastructure in Yosemite Valley.
The Yosemite Valley Plan was later established to implement the General Management Plan and over 250 other actions.
