With the gaining momentum of the Indian independence movement, ham operator Nariman Abarbad Printer VU2FU set up the Azad Hind Radio to broadcast Gandhian protest music and uncensored news; he was immediately arrested and his equipment seized.
To circumvent media restrictions, Indian National Congress activists, led by Usha Mehta, contacted Mumbai based amateur radio operators, Bob Tanna VU2LK and Nariman Printer to help broadcast messages to grass roots party workers across the country.
The club headquarters was later moved to New Delhi, where it was renamed the Amateur Radio Society of India ARSI on 15 May, 1954.
As India's oldest amateur radio organization, ARSI became its representative at the International Amateur Radio Union.
As of 2007 update , there are more than 16,000 ham radio operators in India.
In 1991, during the Gulf War, a lone Indian ham operator in Kuwait, provided the only means of communication between stranded Indian nationals in that country and their relatives in India.
In December 2004, a group of amateur radio operators on DX pedition on the Andaman Islands witnessed the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami.
The Indian Wireless Telegraph Amateur Service Rules, 1978 lists five licence categories To obtain a licence in the first four categories, candidates must pass the Amateur Station Operator's Certificate examination.
Indian amateur radio operators are allotted only the VU call sign prefix.
For example, in November 2007, the WPC temporarily allotted the prefixes AT and AU to selected ham operators to mark the anniversary of the birth of radio scientist Jagadish Chandra Bose.
The WPC had temporarily allotted these call signs to hamfests and DX peditions held at those locations.
The Amateur Radio Society of India ARSI , based in Chennai, is a non profit organization founded in 1954 that represents the interests of amateur radio operators before the India government, provides technical advice and assistance to amateur radio enthusiasts, and supports a number of educational programs throughout the country.
ARSI is India's representative at the International Amateur Radio Union.
The following 14 frequency bands are permitted by the WPC for use by amateur radio operators in India.
The President of India APJ Abdul Kalam, in a speech to the International Union of Radio Science held in New Delhi in 2005, stressed on the promotion of the hobby and setting up of ham stations in local panchayat offices, schools and hospitals.
Amateur radio clubs across the country many join the hobby by organizing courses in preparation for the Amateur Station Operator's Certificate.
The Vigyan Parishad, an apex body for science popularization under the Department of Science and Technology of the Government of India coordinates simulated disaster communication exercises and also organizes trainings to help people getting ham radio licenses in areas vulnerable to natural calamities.
Popular events and activities include Amateur Radio Direction Finding, DX peditions, hamfests, JOTA, QRP operations, Contesting, DX communications, Light House operation, and Islands on Air. One of the most popular activities is Amateur Radio Direction Finding commonly known as a foxhunt .
As amateur radio activity is not permitted on the two union territories due to security restrictions, special permissions were needed to be secured to host the event.
Ham nets, where amateur radio operators check into are regularly conducted across India.
