The first amateur radio operator in India was Amarendra Chandra Gooptu (callsign 2JK), licensed in 1921. 
To circumvent media restrictions, Indian National Congress activists, led by Usha Mehta, contacted Mumbai-based amateur radio operators, "Bob" Tanna (VU2LK) and Nariman Printer to help broadcast messages to grass-roots party workers across the country. 
By 1948, there were 50 amateur radio operators in India, although only a dozen were active. 
Following India's independence in 1947, the first amateur radio organization, the Amateur Radio Club of India was inaugurated on 15 May 1948 at the School of Signals at Mhow in Madhya Pradesh. 
As India's oldest amateur radio organization, ARSI became its representative at the International Amateur Radio Union. 
By 1980, the number of amateur radio operators had risen to 1,500. 
As of 2007[update], there are more than 16,000 ham radio operators in India. 
In 2005, India became one of few countries to launch an amateur radio satellite, the HAMSAT. 
The Indian Wireless Telegraph (Amateur Service) Rules, 1978 lists five licence categories: To obtain a licence in the first four categories, candidates must pass the Amateur Station Operator's Certificate examination. 
In a 2005 notification, the WPC proposed an amendment to the 1978 Amateur Service Rules in the rationalization of the licence categories to only two: the Amateur Wireless Telegraph Station Licence (General) and the Amateur Wireless Telegraph Station Licence (Restricted). 
Indian amateur radio operators are allotted only the VU call-sign prefix. 
The WPC is responsible for regulating amateur radio in India. 
In India, amateur radio is governed by the Indian Wireless Telegraphs (Amateur Service) Rules, 1978, the Indian Wireless Telegraph Rules, and the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. 
The Amateur Radio Society of India (ARSI), based in Chennai, is a non-profit organization founded in 1954 that represents the interests of amateur radio operators before the India government, provides technical advice and assistance to amateur radio enthusiasts, and supports a number of educational programs throughout the country. 
ARSI is India's representative at the International Amateur Radio Union. 
NIAR was established by the Ministry of Communications in 1983 to promote amateur radio in India. 
The following 14 frequency bands are permitted by the WPC for use by amateur radio operators in India. 
Indian amateur radio operators number just 16,000 for a population of 1.2 billion, or less than 0.002 percent of the population. 
After decades of lobbying to include ham radio in school syllabi, efforts paid off in 2006 after the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) included ham radio in the chapter of Emergency communications on the subject of Disaster Management. 
Amateur radio clubs across the country many join the hobby by organizing courses in preparation for the Amateur Station Operator's Certificate. 
Ham nets, where amateur radio operators "check into" are regularly conducted across India. 
