One example was the Sugar Act, which was a tax levied against Providence's distilleries that adversely affected its trade in rum and slaves. 
The Great Depression hit the city hard, and Providence's downtown was subsequently flooded by the New England Hurricane of 1938. 
In the 1990s, Mayor Vincent Cianci, Jr showcased the city's strength in arts and pushed for further revitalization, ultimately resulting in the uncovering of the city's natural rivers (which had been paved over), relocation of a large section of railroad underground, creation of Waterplace Park and river walks along the river's banks, and construction of the Fleet Skating Rink (now the Bank of America Skating Rink) downtown and the 1.4 million ft² Providence Place Mall. 
Providence is located at the head of Narragansett Bay, with the Providence River running into the bay through the center of the city, formed by the confluence of the Moshassuck and Woonasquatucket Rivers. 
are the most prominent of the city's hills. 
Providence has 25 official neighborhoods, though these neighborhoods are often grouped together and referred to collectively: The city of Providence is geographically very compact, characteristic of eastern seaboard cities which developed prior to use of the automobile. 
The newer area, sometimes called "Capitol Center", includes Providence Place Mall (1999), a Westin hotel (1993) and The Residences at the Westin (2007), GTECH (2006), Waterplace condominiums (2007), and Waterplace Park (1994); the area tends toward newer development since much of it is land reclaimed in the 1970s from a mass of railroad tracks which was referred to colloquially as the "Chinese Wall". 
Hispanic impact is even larger in the city's schools. 
Asians are 6% of Providence's population and have enclaves scattered throughout the city. 
The Providence metropolitan area, which includes Providence, Fall River, Massachusetts, and Warwick is estimated to be 1,622,520. 
The median age of the city is 28 years, while the largest age cohort is 20 to 24 year olds, owing to the city's large student population. 
The per capita income, as of the 2000 census, was $15,525, which is well below both the state average of $29,113, and the national average of $21,587. 
The median income for a household was $26,867, and the median income for a family in Providence was $32,058, according to the 2000 census. 
The city has one of the highest rates of poverty in the nation with 29.1% of the population and 23.9% of families living below the poverty line in 2000, the largest concentrations being found in the city's Olneyville, and Upper and Lower South Providence areas. 
The pattern of violent crime was highly specific by neighborhood with vast majority of the murders taking place in the poorest sections of Providence, such as Washington Park, Elmwood, South Providence and the West End. 
Providence was one of the first cities to industrialize in the United States. 
Though manufacturing has declined, the city is still one of the largest centers for jewelry and silverware design and manufacturing. 
Since it is the capital of Rhode Island, Providence's economy additionally consists of government services. 
The Fortune 500 conglomerate Textron and Fortune 1000 company Nortek Incorporated are both headquartered in the city, and GTECH's world headquarters has recently been moved to downtown Providence. 
Citizens Bank is also headquartered in Providence. 
Another company whose origins were in the city is Fleet Bank. 
Along with a hotel, the convention center is connected to the Providence Place Mall, a major retail center, through a skywalk. 
The Providence City Council consists of fifteen city councilors, one for each of the city's wards. 
David N. Cicilline was elected mayor by a large margin in 2002 and was re-elected without any major opposition in 2006. 
Providence was the largest American city to have an openly gay mayor, until Sam Adams took office in Portland, Oregon on January 1, 2009. 
Between these schools the number of postsecondary students is approximately 44,000, or 25% the population of Providence. 
LaSalle Academy is located in the Elmhurst area of the city near Providence College. 
The overall graduation rate as of 2007 is 70.1%, which is close to the statewide rate of 71% and the national average of 70%. 
Much of Providence culture is synonymous with Rhode Island culture. 
Providence is also reputed to have the highest number of restaurants per capita, many of which are founded and/or staffed by its own Johnson & Wales graduates. 
The city gained the reputation as one of the most active and growing LGBT communities in the Northeast; the rate of reported gay and lesbian relationships is 75% higher than the national average and Providence has been named among the "Best Lesbian Places to Live". 
Providence is home to the largest gay bathhouse in New England. 
There are multiple Waterfire events that are accompanied by various pieces of classical and world music. 
The city is also the home of the Tony Award-winning theater group Trinity Repertory Company, the Providence Black Repertory Company, and the Rhode Island Philharmonic Orchestra. 
Providence is also the home of several performing arts centers such as the Veterans Memorial Auditorium, the Providence Performing Arts Center, and the Providence Festival Ballet. 
Downcity Providence is home to the fourth largest unsupported dome in the world (the second largest marble dome after St. Peter's Basilica in Rome), as well as the Westminster Arcade, which is the oldest enclosed shopping center in the U.S. 
In addition to the Providence Public Library and its nine branches, the city is home to the Providence Athenæum, the fourth oldest library in the country. 
The Bank of America Skating Center, formerly the Fleet Skating Center, is located near Kennedy Plaza in the downtown district, connected by pedestrian tunnel to Waterplace Park, a cobblestone and concrete park below street traffic that abuts Providence's three rivers. 
The city is home to the American Hockey League team Providence Bruins, which plays at the Dunkin' Donuts Center (formerly the Providence Civic Center). 
Providence was formerly home to two major league franchises: the NFL's Providence Steam Roller in the 1920s and 1930s, and the NBA's Providence Steamrollers in the 1940s. 
Providence is home to eight hospitals, most prominently Rhode Island Hospital, the largest general acute care hospital in the state. 
The city is also home to the Roger Williams Medical Center, St. Joseph Hospital For Specialty Care (a division of St. Joseph Health Services Of Rhode Island), The Miriam Hospital, a major teaching affiliate associated with the Alpert Medical School of Brown University, as well as a VA medical center. 
Additionally, funds have been allocated to extend the commuter rail from Providence to T. F. Green Airport terminating at a $222.5 million intermodal station to be completed in 2009. 
The project is estimated to cost $446 million and be completed in 2012. 
