While Oscy is more interested in sex with gorgeous girls, however, Hermie finds himself developing genuine romantic interest in the young bride, whose husband he spots leaving the island on a military transport boat one morning. 
Oscy and Hermie convince the reluctant Benjie to steal the book; upon reading it, Oscy and Hermie become convinced they now know everything necessary to lose their virginity and become great lovers. 
They decide to put this hypothesis to the test by going to the island film house and picking up a trio of girls; Oscy happens to find three high-school girls, and sets about staking out the most attractive one, Miriam (Christopher Norris), for himself, "giving" Hermie her wallflower friend, Aggie (Katherine Allentuck) and leaving Benjie with Gloria, a heavyset girl with braces. 
Frightened by the reality of the concept of sex, Benjie runs away into the night, and is not seen by Hermie or Oscy again the whole summer. 
Hermie and Oscy spend the entirety of the film (Now, Voyager - an anachronism, as that film wasn't released until October 1942) attempting to "score" with Miriam and Aggie, Oscy aggressively pursuing Miriam to the point that she strikes him, although Oscy soon learns that she is the island "hussy" and simply playing hard to get. 
Later, in preparation for a marshmallow roast on the beach with Aggie and Miriam, Hermie and Oscy make carbon copies from the sex manual; then Hermie goes to the local drugstore, and in a protracted sequence attempts to build up the nerve to ask the pharmacist for condoms. 
That night, during the marshmallow roast, Hermie finds himself unable to "put the moves" on Aggie, although Oscy is successful in having sex with Miriam between some sand dunes; he is so successful, in fact, he eventually sneaks over to where Hermie and Aggie are roasting marshmallows and asks Hermie to give him some condoms, having run out of his own. 
An elated Hermie goes home and puts on a suit, saddle shoes, and a dress shirt, and heads back to Dorothy's house, running into Oscy on the way; Oscy relates Miriam's appendix burst that morning 
Sensing that something traumatic has occurred between Hermie and Dorothy, Oscy, in an uncharacteristic act of sensitivity, lets Hermie be by himself, departing with the words, "Sometimes life is just one big pain in the ass." 
Hermie goes back to Dorothy's house to try to sort out what has happened; he finds it abandoned, Dorothy having fled the island in the night. 
In the film's final scene, Hermie is seen looking at Dorothy's old house and the ocean and remembering the day that he, Oscy, and Benjie first saw her, as the adult Herman Raucher sadly recounts that in the ensuing years he has never seen Dorothy again or learned what became of her. 
The film (and subsequent novel) were memoirs written by Herman Raucher; they detailed the events in his life over the course of the summer he spent on Nantucket Island in 1942 when he was fourteen years old. 
He never saw her again; his last "encounter" with her, recounted on an episode of The Mike Douglas Show, came after the film's release in 1971, when she was one of over a dozen women who wrote letters to Raucher claiming to be "his" Dorothy. 
Raucher's novelization of the screenplay, with the dedication, "To those I love, past and present," serves more as the tribute to Seltzer that he had intended the film to be, with the focus of the book being more on the two boys' relationship than Raucher's relationship with Dorothy. 
The film became a blockbuster upon its release, grossing twenty-five million dollars, making it the fourth highest grossing film of 1971 and one of the most successful films in history, with an expense to profit ratio of 1:25; beyond that, it is estimated video rentals and purchases in the United States since the 1980s have produced an additional $20.5 million dollars. 
Ultimately, the film only won two awards, the "Best Score" Oscar" and the BAFTA Anthony Asquith Award for Film Music, both to Michel Legrand. 
Still, it counted among its fans Stanley Kubrick, who in a rare moment of pop-culture infusion into his films, had the film play on a television in a scene in The Shining. 
In 1973, the film was followed up with a sequel, Class of '44, a slice-of-life film made up of vignettes about Herman Raucher and Oscar Selzter's experiences in college prior to fighting in the Korean War. 
Jennifer O'Neill did not appear in the film at all, nor was the character of Dorothy mentioned. 
In the ensuing years since the film's release, Warner Bros. has attempted to buy back Raucher's ten-percent of the film as well as his rights to the story so it could be remade; Raucher has consistently declined. 
The 1988 film Stealing Home shares numerous similarities not only to Summer of '42 but also Class of '44, with several incidents (most notably a subplot dealing with the premature death of the protagonist's father and the protagonist's response to it) appearing to have been directly lifted from Raucher's own life; Jennifer O'Neill stated in 2002 she believes "Home" was an attempted remake of "Summer". 
Nevertheless, the play was enough to spark interest in the film and book with a new generation, prompting Warner to re-issue the book (which had since gone out of print, along with all of Raucher's other works) for sale with Barnes & Noble's online bookstore, and to restore the film and release it on DVD. 
In 2002, Jennifer O'Neill claimed to have obtained the rights to make a sequel to Summer of '42, based on a short story she wrote, which took place in an alternate reality in which Herman Raucher had a son and divorced his wife, went back to Nantucket in 1962 with a still-living Oscar Seltzer, and encountered Dorothy again and married her. 
