After the stills finish, we hear Raucher speaking in the present day 1971 according to the book , recalling the summer he spent on the island fictionalized in the novel as Packett Island in 1942.
The film flashes back to a day that then 15 year old Hermie Gary Grimes and his friends jock Oscy Jerry Houser and introverted nerd Benjie Oliver Conant spent running and playing on the beach.
The next several days on the island find the boys continuing to spend their afternoons on the beach, where, in the midst of young, scantily clad teenage girls, their thoughts invariably turn to sex; all of them are virgins, the height of their experience being when Oscy and Hermie touched a girl's breasts when they were twelve.
While Oscy is more interested in sex with gorgeous girls, however, Hermie finds himself developing genuine romantic interest in the young bride, whose husband he spots leaving the island on a military transport boat one morning.
They decide to put this hypothesis to the test by going to the island film house and picking up a trio of girls; Oscy happens to find three high school girls, and sets about staking out the most attractive one, Miriam Christopher Norris , for himself, giving Hermie her wallflower friend, Aggie Katherine Allentuck and leaving Benjie with Gloria, a heavyset girl with braces.
Frightened by the reality of the concept of sex, Benjie runs away into the night, and is not seen by Hermie or Oscy again the whole summer.
Hermie and Oscy spend the entirety of the film Now, Voyager an anachronism, as that film wasn't released until October 1942 attempting to score with Miriam and Aggie, Oscy aggressively pursuing Miriam to the point that she strikes him, although Oscy soon learns that she is the island hussy and simply playing hard to get.
That night, during the marshmallow roast, Hermie finds himself unable to put the moves on Aggie, although Oscy is successful in having sex with Miriam between some sand dunes; he is so successful, in fact, he eventually sneaks over to where Hermie and Aggie are roasting marshmallows and asks Hermie to give him some condoms, having run out of his own.
Hermie offers to come keep her company that night and she says she looks forward to seeing him, finally revealing that her name is Dorothy.
An elated Hermie goes home and puts on a suit, saddle shoes, and a dress shirt, and heads back to Dorothy's house, running into Oscy on the way; Oscy relates Miriam's appendix burst that morning and she's been rushed to the mainland.
Hermie goes back to Dorothy's house to try to sort out what has happened; he finds it abandoned, Dorothy having fled the island in the night.
In the film's final scene, Hermie is seen looking at Dorothy's old house and the ocean and remembering the day that he, Oscy, and Benjie first saw her, as the adult Herman Raucher sadly recounts that in the ensuing years he has never seen Dorothy again or learned what became of her.
The film and subsequent novel were memoirs written by Herman Raucher; they detailed the events in his life over the course of the summer he spent on Nantucket Island in 1942 when he was fourteen years old.
The woman named Dorothy, like her screen counterpart was a fellow vacationer on the island whom Raucher had befriended one day when he helped her carry groceries home; he became a friend of her and her husband and helped her with chores after her husband was called to fight in World War II.
The next morning, Raucher discovered that she had left the island, leaving behind a note for him which is read at the end of the film and reproduced in the book .
He never saw her again; his last encounter with her, recounted on an episode of The Mike Douglas Show, came after the film's release in 1971, when she was one of over a dozen women who wrote letters to Raucher claiming to be his Dorothy.
Raucher's novelization of the screenplay, with the dedication, To those I love, past and present, serves more as the tribute to Seltzer that he had intended the film to be, with the focus of the book being more on the two boys' relationship than Raucher's relationship with Dorothy.
After production, Warner Bros., still wary about the film only being a minor success, asked Raucher to adapt his script into a book.
In 1973, the film was followed up with a sequel, Class of '44, a slice of life film made up of vignettes about Herman Raucher and Oscar Selzter's experiences in college prior to fighting in the Korean War. The only crew member left from Summer of '42 was Raucher himself, with a new director and composer being brought in to replace Mulligan and Legrand.
Jennifer O'Neill did not appear in the film at all, nor was the character of Dorothy mentioned.
The 1988 film Stealing Home shares numerous similarities not only to Summer of '42 but also Class of '44, with several incidents most notably a subplot dealing with the premature death of the protagonist's father and the protagonist's response to it appearing to have been directly lifted from Raucher's own life; Jennifer O'Neill stated in 2002 she believes Home was an attempted remake of Summer .
In 2002, Jennifer O'Neill claimed to have obtained the rights to make a sequel to Summer of '42, based on a short story she wrote, which took place in an alternate reality in which Herman Raucher had a son and divorced his wife, went back to Nantucket in 1962 with a still living Oscar Seltzer, and encountered Dorothy again and married her.
