With the exception of some embedded software and operating system code, the success of a
software product is determined by the humans who use the product. These notes give an
overview of theoretical and practical approaches to making successful and usable software.
A user-centred design process, as taught in earlier years of the tripos and experienced in
many group design projects, provides a professional approach to creating software with
functionality that users need. However, the availability of technical functionality does not
guarantee that software will be practically usable. Software that is usable for its purpose is
sometimes described by programmers as “intuitive” (easy to learn, easy to remember, easy
to apply to new problems) or “powerful” (efficient, effective). These terms are vague and
unscientific, but they point in the right direction. This course presents scientific approaches
to building software applications and digital products that are “intuitive” and “powerful”.
HCI helps us to understand why some software products are good and other software is
bad. But sadly it is not a guaranteed formula for creating a successful product. In this sense
it is like architecture or product design. Architects and product designers need a thorough
technical grasp of the materials they work with, but the success of their work depends on
the creative application of this technical knowledge. This creativity is a craft skill that in
those disciplines is learned by working with a master designer in a studio, or from case
studies of successful designs. A computer science course does not provide sufficient time
for this kind of training in creative design, but it can provide the essential elements: an
understanding of the user’s needs, and an understanding of potential solutions.
There are many different approaches to the study and design of user interfaces. This course
attempts, so far as possible within 8 lectures, to discuss the important aspects of fields
including: Interaction Design, User Experience Design (UX), Interactive Systems Design,
Information Visualisation, Cognitive Ergonomics, Man-Machine Interface (MMI), User
Interface Design (UI), Human Factors, Cognitive Task Design, Information Architecture
(IA), Software Product Design, Usability Engineering, User-Centred Design (UCD) and
Computer Supported Collaborative Work (CSCW).
These investigations require a wide range of academic styles, extending across all the parts
of the University. Lack of familiarity with other kinds of investigation and analysis can
make it hard to absorb or collaborate with other perspectives. The advantages of different
disciplines can range from those that are interpretive to those that are scientific (both are
necessary), the first criticized as soft and the second as reductionist, and each relying on
different kinds of knowledge, with suspicion of those seen as relativist at one extreme or
positivist at the other. In professional work, the most important attributes for HCI experts
are to be both creative and practical, placing design at the centre of the field.